A major fraction of loci identified by genome-wide association studies (GWASs) mediate alternative splicing, but mechanistic interpretation is hindered by the technical limitations of short-read RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), which cannot directly link splicing events to full-length protein isoforms. Long-read RNA-seq represents a powerful tool to characterize transcript isoforms, and recently, infer protein isoform existence. Here, we present an approach that integrates information from GWASs, splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTLs), and PacBio long-read RNA-seq in a disease-relevant model to infer the effects of sQTLs on the ultimate protein isoform products they encode. We demonstrate the utility of our approach using bone mineral density (BMD) GWAS data. We identified 1,863 sQTLs from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project in 732 protein-coding genes that colocalized with BMD associations (H4PP >= 0.75). We generated PacBio Iso-Seq data (N N =-22 million full-length reads) on human osteoblasts, identifying 68,326 protein-coding isoforms, of which 17,375 (25%) were unannotated. By casting the sQTLs onto protein isoforms, we connected 809 sQTLs to 2,029 protein isoforms from 441 genes expressed in osteoblasts. Overall, we found that 74 sQTLs influenced isoforms likely impacted by nonsense-mediated decay and 190 that potentially resulted in the expression of unannotated protein isoforms. Finally, we functionally validated colocalizing sQTLs in TPM2, , in which siRNA-mediated knockdown in osteoblasts showed two TPM2 isoforms with opposing effects on mineralization but exhibited no effect upon knockdown of the entire gene. Our approach should be to generalize across diverse clinical traits and to provide insights into protein isoform activities modulated by GWAS loci.
Allele-specific expression plays a crucial role in unraveling various biological mechanisms, including genomic imprinting and gene expression controlled by cis- regulatory variants. However, existing methods for quantification from RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) reads do not adequately and efficiently remove various allele-specific read mapping biases, such as reference bias arising from reads containing the alternative allele that do not map to the reference transcriptome or ambiguous mapping bias caused by reads containing the reference allele that map differently from reads containing the alternative allele. We present Ornaments, a computational tool for rapid and accurate estimation of allele-specific transcript expression at unphased heterozygous loci from RNA-seq reads while correcting for allele- specific read mapping biases. Ornaments removes reference bias by mapping reads to a personalized transcriptome and ambiguous mapping bias by probabilistically assigning reads to multiple transcripts and variant loci they map to. Ornaments is a lightweight extension of kallisto, a popular tool for fast RNA-seq quantification, that improves the efficiency and accuracy of WASP, a popular tool for bias correction in allele-specific read mapping. In experiments with simulated and human lymphoblastoid cell-line RNA-seq reads with the genomes of the 1000 Genomes Project, we demonstrate that Ornaments improves the accuracy of WASP and kallisto, is nearly as efficient as kallisto, and is an order of magnitude faster than WASP per sample, with the additional cost of constructing a personalized index for multiple samples. Additionally, we show that Ornaments finds imprinted transcripts with higher sensitivity than WASP, which detects imprinted signals only at gene level.
We use the implementation science framework RE -AIM (reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance) to describe outcomes of In Our DNA SC, a population -wide genomic screening (PWGS) program. In Our DNA SC involves participation through clinical appointments, community events, or at home collection. Participants provide a saliva sample that is sequenced by Helix, and those with a pathogenic variant or likely pathogenic variant for CDC Tier 1 conditions are offered free genetic counseling. We assessed key outcomes among the first cohort of individuals recruited. Over 14 months, 20,478 participants enrolled, and 14,053 samples were collected. The majority selected at-home sample collection followed by clinical sample collection and collection at community events. Participants were predominately female, White (self -identified), non -Hispanic, and between the ages of 40-49. Participants enrolled through community events were the most racially diverse and the youngest. Half of those enrolled completed the program. We identified 137 individuals with pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants for CDC Tier 1 conditions. The majority (77.4%) agreed to genetic counseling, and of those that agreed, 80.2% completed counseling. Twelve clinics participated, and we conducted 108 collection events. Participants enrolled at home were most likely to return their sample for sequencing. Through this evaluation, we identified facilitators and barriers to implementation of our state-wide PWGS program. Standardized reporting using implementation science frameworks can help generalize strategies and improve the impact of PWGS.
Treatments for neurodegenerative disorders remain rare, but recent FDA approvals, such as lecanemab and aducanumab for Alzheimer disease (MIM: 607822), highlight the importance of the underlying biological mechanisms in driving discovery and creating disease modifying therapies. The global population is aging, driving an urgent need for therapeutics that stop disease progression and eliminate symptoms. In this study, we create an open framework and resource for evidence-based identification of therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative disease. We use summary-data-based Mendelian randomization to identify genetic targets for drug discovery and repurposing. In parallel, we provide mechanistic insights into disease processes and potential network-level consequences of gene-based therapeutics. We identify 116 Alzheimer disease, 3 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MIM: 105400), 5 Lewy body dementia (MIM: 127750), 46 Parkinson disease (MIM: 605909), and 9 progressive supranuclear palsy (MIM: 601104) target genes passing multiple test corrections (p(SMR_multi) < 2.95 x 10(-6) and p(HEIDI) > 0.01). We created a therapeutic scheme to classify our identified target genes into strata based on druggability and approved therapeutics, classifying 41 novel targets, 3 known targets, and 115 difficult targets (of these, 69.8% are expressed in the disease-relevant cell type from single-nucleus experiments). Our novel class of genes provides a springboard for new opportunities in drug discovery, development, and repurposing in the pre-competitive space. In addition, looking at drug-gene interaction networks, we identify previous trials that may require further follow-up such as riluzole in Alzheimer disease. We also provide a user-friendly web platform to help users explore potential therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative diseases, decreasing activation energy for the community.
Craniofacial phenotyping is critical for both syndrome delineation and diagnosis because craniofacial abnormalities occur in 30% of characterized genetic syndromes. Clinical reports, textbooks, and available software tools typically provide two-dimensional, static images and illustrations of the characteristic phenotypes of genetic syndromes. In this work, we provide an interactive web application that provides three-dimensional, dynamic visualizations for the characteristic craniofacial effects of 95 syndromes. Users can visualize syndrome facial appearance estimates quantified from data and easily compare craniofacial phenotypes of different syndromes. Our application also provides a map of morphological similarity between a target syndrome and other syndromes. Finally, users can upload 3D facial scans of individuals and compare them to our syndrome atlas estimates. In summary, we provide an interactive reference for the craniofacial phenotypes of syndromes that allows for precise, individual -specific comparisons of dysmorphology.
Recurrent genomic rearrangements at 16p11.2 BP4-5 represent one of the most common causes of genomic disorders. Originally associated with increased risk for autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and intellectual disability, as well as adiposity and head circumference, these CNVs have since been associated with a plethora of phenotypic alterations, albeit with high variability in expressivity and incomplete penetrance. Here, we comprehensively review the pleiotropy associated with 16p11.2 BP4-5 rearrangements to shine light on its full phenotypic spectrum. Illustrating this phenotypic heterogeneity, we expose many parallels between findings gathered from clinical versus populationbased cohorts, which often point to the same physiological systems, and emphasize the role of the CNV beyond neuropsychiatric and anthropometric traits. Revealing the complex and variable clinical manifestations of this CNV is crucial for accurate diagnosis and personalized treatment strategies for carrier individuals. Furthermore, we discuss areas of research that will be key to identifying factors contributing to phenotypic heterogeneity and gaining mechanistic insights into the molecular pathways underlying observed associations, while demonstrating how diversity in affected individuals, cohorts, experimental models, and analytical approaches can catalyze discoveries.
Whereas 16p11.2 BP4-5 copy-number variants (CNVs) represent one of the most pleiotropic etiologies of genomic syndromes in both clinical and population cohorts, the mechanisms leading to such pleiotropy remain understudied. Identifying 73 deletion and 89 duplication carrier individuals among unrelated White British UK Biobank participants, we performed a phenome-wide association study (PheWAS) between the region's copy number and 117 complex traits and diseases, mimicking four dosage models. Forty-six phenotypes (39%) were affected by 16p11.2 BP4-5 CNVs, with the deletion-only, mirror, U-shape, and duplication-only models being the best fit for 30, 10, 4, and 2 phenotypes, respectively, aligning with the stronger deleteriousness of the deletion. Upon individually adjusting CNV effects for either body mass index (BMI), height, or educational attainment (EA), we found that sixteen testable deletion-driven associations-primarily with cardiovascular and metabolic traits-were BMI dependent, with EA playing a more subtle role and no association depending on height. Bidirectional Mendelian randomization supported that 13 out of these 16 associations were secondary consequences of the CNV's impact on BMI. For the 23 traits that remained significantly associated upon individual adjustment for mediators, matched-control analyses found that 10 phenotypes, including musculoskeletal traits, liver enzymes, fluid intelligence, platelet count, and pneumonia and acute kidney injury risk, remained associated under strict Bonferroni correction, with 10 additional nominally significant associations. These results paint a complex picture of 16p11.2 BP4-5's pleiotropic pattern that involves direct effects on multiple physiological systems and indirect co-morbidities consequential to the CNV's impact on BMI and EA, acting through trait-specific dosage mechanisms.
The function of some genetic variants associated with brain-relevant traits has been explained through colocalization with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) conducted in bulk postmortem adult brain tissue. However, many brain-trait associated loci have unknown cellular or molecular function. These genetic variants may exert context-specific function on different molecular phenotypes including post-transcriptional changes. Here, we identified genetic regulation of RNA editing and alternative polyadenylation (APA) within a cell- type-specific population of human neural progenitors and neurons. More RNA editing and isoforms utilizing longer polyadenylation sequences were observed in neurons, likely due to higher expression of genes encoding the proteins mediating these post-transcriptional events. We also detected hundreds of cell-type-specific editing quantitative trait loci (edQTLs) and alternative polyadenylation QTLs (apaQTLs). We found colocalizations of a neuron edQTL in CCDC88A with educational attainment and a progenitor apaQTL in EP300 with schizophrenia, suggesting that genetically mediated post-transcriptional regulation during brain development leads to differences in brain function.
Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) result from impaired development and functioning of the brain. Here, we identify loss -of -function (LoF) variation in ZFHX3 as a cause for syndromic intellectual disability (ID). ZFHX3 is a zinc -finger homeodomain transcription factor involved in various biological processes, including cell differentiation and tumorigenesis. We describe 42 individuals with protein -truncating variants (PTVs) or (partial) deletions of ZFHX3 , exhibiting variable intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder, recurrent facial features, relative short stature, brachydactyly, and, rarely, cleft palate. ZFHX3 LoF associates with a specific methylation profile in whole blood extracted DNA. Nuclear abundance of ZFHX3 increases during human brain development and neuronal differentiation. ZFHX3 was found to interact with the chromatin remodeling BRG1/Brm-associated factor complex and the cleavage and polyadenylation complex, suggesting a function in chromatin remodeling and mRNA processing. Furthermore, ChIP-seq for ZFHX3 revealed that it predominantly binds promoters of genes involved in nervous system development. We conclude that loss -of -function variants in ZFHX3 are a cause of syndromic ID associating with a specific DNA methylation profile.
Clinical exome and genome sequencing have revolutionized the understanding of human disease genetics. Yet many genes remain functionally uncharacterized, complicating the establishment of causal disease links for genetic variants. While several scoring methods have been devised to prioritize these candidate genes, these methods fall short of capturing the expression heterogeneity across cell subpopulations within tissues. Here, we introduce single -cell tissue -specific gene prioritization using machine learning (STIGMA), an approach that leverages single -cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data to prioritize candidate genes associated with rare congenital diseases. STIGMA prioritizes genes by learning the temporal dynamics of gene expression across cell types during healthy organogenesis. To assess the efficacy of our framework, we applied STIGMA to mouse limb and human fetal heart scRNA-seq datasets. In a cohort of individuals with congenital limb malformation, STIGMA prioritized 469 variants in 345 genes, with UBA2 as a notable example. For congenital heart defects, we detected 34 genes harboring nonsynonymous de novo variants (nsDNVs) in two or more individuals from a set of 7,958 individuals, including the ortholog of Prdm1, which is associated with hypoplastic left ventricle and hypoplastic aortic arch. Overall, our findings demonstrate that STIGMA effectively prioritizes tissue -specific candidate genes by utilizing singlecell transcriptome data. The ability to capture the heterogeneity of gene expression across cell populations makes STIGMA a powerful tool for the discovery of disease -associated genes and facilitates the identification of causal variants underlying human genetic disorders.
WD repeat domain 83 opposite strand ( WDR83OS ) encodes the 106-aa (amino acid) protein Asterix, which heterodimerizes with CCDC47 to form the PAT (protein associated with ER translocon) complex. This complex functions as a chaperone for large proteins containing transmembrane domains to ensure proper folding. Until recently, little was known about the role of WDR83OS or CCDC47 in human disease traits. However, biallelic variants in CCDC47 were identified in four unrelated families with trichohepatoneurodevelopmental syndrome, characterized by a neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) with liver dysfunction. Three affected siblings in an additional family share a homozygous truncating WDR83OS variant and a phenotype of NDD, dysmorphic features, and liver dysfunction. Using family-based rare variant analyses of exome sequencing (ES) data and case matching through GeneMatcher, we describe the clinical phenotypes of 11 additional individuals in eight unrelated families (nine unrelated families, 14 individuals in total) with biallelic putative truncating variants in WDR83OS. Consistent clinical features include NDD (14/14), facial dysmorphism (13/14), intractable itching (9/14), and elevated bile acids (5/6). Whereas bile acids were significantly elevated in 5/6 of individuals tested, bilirubin was normal and liver enzymes were normal to mildly elevated in all 14 individuals. In three of six individuals for whom longitudinal data were available, we observed a progressive reduction in relative head circumference. A zebrafish model lacking Wdr83os function further supports its role in the nervous system, craniofacial development, and lipid absorption. Taken together, our data support a disease-gene association between biallelic loss-of-function of WDR83OS and a neurological disease trait with hypercholanemia.
The BAF chromatin remodeler regulates lineage commitment including cranial neural crest cell (CNCC) specification. Variants in BAF subunits cause Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), a congenital disorder characterized by coarse craniofacial features and intellectual disability. Approximately 50% of individuals with CSS harbor variants in one of the mutually exclusive BAF subunits, ARID1A/ARID1B. . While Arid1a deletion in mouse neural crest causes severe craniofacial phenotypes, little is known about the role of ARID1A in CNCC specification. Using CSS-patient-derived ARID1A+/- +/- induced pluripotent stem cells to model CNCC specification, we discovered that ARID1A-- haploinsufficiency impairs epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process necessary for CNCC delamination and migration from the neural tube. Furthermore, wild-type ARID1A-BAF regulates enhancers associated with EMT genes. ARID1A-BAF binding at these enhancers is impaired in heterozygotes while binding at promoters is unaffected. At the sequence level, these EMT enhancers contain binding motifs for ZIC2, and ZIC2 binding at these sites is ARID1A-dependent. When excluded from EMT enhancers, ZIC2 relocates to neuronal enhancers, triggering aberrant neuronal gene activation. In mice, deletion of Zic2 impairs NCC delamination, while ZIC2 over- expression in chick embryos at post-migratory neural crest stages elicits ectopic delamination from the neural tube. These findings reveal an essential ARID1A-ZIC2 axis essential for EMT and CNCC delamination.
Sterile alpha motif domain containing 7 (SAMD7) is a component of the Polycomb repressive complex 1, which inhibits transcription of many genes, including those activated by the transcription factor Cone -Rod Homeobox (CRX). Here we report bi-allelic mutations in SAMD7 as a cause of autosomal-recessive macular dystrophy with or without cone dysfunction. Four of these mutations affect splicing, while another mutation is a missense variant that alters the repressive effect of SAMD7 on CRX-dependent promoter activity, as shown by in vitro assays. Immunostaining of human retinal sections revealed that SAMD7 is localized in the nuclei of both rods and cones, as well as in those of cells belonging to the inner nuclear layer. These results place SAMD7 as a gene crucial for human retinal function and demonstrate a significant difference in the role of SAMD7 between the human and the mouse retina.
A recent publication describing the assembly of the Y chromosomes of 43 males was remarkable not only for its ambitious technical scope but also for the startling suggestion that the boundary of the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1), where the human X and Y chromosomes engage in crossing-over during male meiosis, lies 500 kb distal to its previously reported location. Where is the boundary of the human PAR1? We first review the evidence that mapped the PAR boundary, or PAB, before the human genome draft sequence was produced, then examine post-genomic datasets for evidence of crossing-over between the X and Y, and lastly re-examine contiguous sequence assemblies of the PAR-NPY boundary to see whether they support a more distal PAB. We find ample evidence of X-Y crossovers throughout the 500 kb in question, some as close as 246 bp to the previously reported PAB. Our new analyses, combined with previous studies over the past 40 years, provide overwhelming evidence to support the original position and narrow the probable location of the PAB to a 201-bp window.
Ion channels mediate voltage fluxes or action potentials that are central to the functioning of excitable cells such as neurons. The KCNB family of voltage -gated potassium channels (Kv) consists of two members (KCNB1 and KCNB2) encoded by KCNB1 and KCNB2 , respectively. These channels are major contributors to delayed rectifier potassium currents arising from the neuronal soma which modulate overall excitability of neurons. In this study, we identified several mono -allelic pathogenic missense variants in KCNB2 , in individuals with a neurodevelopmental syndrome with epilepsy and autism in some individuals. Recurrent dysmorphisms included a broad forehead, synophrys, and digital anomalies. Additionally, we selected three variants where genetic transmission has not been assessed, from two epilepsy studies, for inclusion in our experiments. We characterized channel properties of these variants by expressing them in oocytes of Xenopus laevis and conducting cut -open oocyte voltage clamp electrophysiology. Our datasets indicate no significant change in absolute conductance and conductance -voltage relationships of most disease variants as compared to wild type (WT), when expressed either alone or co -expressed with WT-KCNB2. However, variants c.1141A >G (p.Thr381Ala) and c.641C >T (p.Thr214Met) show complete abrogation of currents when expressed alone with the former exhibiting a left shift in activation midpoint when expressed alone or with WT-KCNB2. The variants we studied, nevertheless, show collective features of increased inactivation shifted to hyperpolarized potentials. We suggest that the effects of the variants on channel inactivation result in hyper -excitability of neurons, which contributes to disease manifestations.
Human humoral immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 vaccines exhibit substantial inter -individual variability and have been linked to vaccine efficacy. To elucidate the underlying mechanism behind this variability, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on the anti -spike IgG serostatus of UK Biobank participants who were previously uninfected by SARS-CoV-2 and had received either the first dose (n = 54,066) or the second dose (n = 46,232) of COVID-19 vaccines. Our analysis revealed significant genome-wide associations between the IgG antibody serostatus following the initial vaccine and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II alleles. Specifically, the HLA-DRB1*13:02 allele (MAF = 4.0%, OR = 0.75, p = 2.34e-16) demonstrated the most statistically significant protective effect against IgG seronegativity. This protective effect was driven by an alteration from arginine (Arg) to glutamic acid (Glu) at position 71 on HLADRB1 (p = 1.88e-25), leading to a change in the electrostatic potential of pocket 4 of the peptide binding groove. Notably, the impact of HLA alleles on IgG responses was cell type specific, and we observed a shared genetic predisposition between IgG status and susceptibility/severity of COVID-19. These results were replicated within independent cohorts where IgG serostatus was assayed by two different antibody serology tests. Our findings provide insights into the biological mechanism underlying individual variation in responses to COVID-19 vaccines and highlight the need to consider the influence of constitutive genetics when designing vaccination strategies for optimizing protection and control of infectious disease across diverse populations.
The 2015 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology variant classification lication established a standard employed internationally to guide laboratories in variant assessment. Those recommendations included both pathogenic (PP1) and benign (BS4) criteria for evaluating the inheritance patterns of variants, but details of how to apply criteria at appropriate evidence levels were sparse. Several publications have since attempted to provide additional guidance, but dotally, this issue is still challenging. Additionally, it is not clear that those prior efforts fully distinguished disease-gene identification considerations from variant pathogenicity considerations nor did they address autosomal-recessive and X-linked inheritance. we have taken a mixed inductive and deductive approach to this problem using real diseases as examples. We have developed a practical heuristic for genetic co-segregation evidence and have also determined that the specific phenotype criterion (PP4) is inseparably coupled to the co-segregation criterion. We have also determined that negative evidence at one locus constitutes positive evidence for other for disorders with locus heterogeneity. Finally, we provide a points-based system for evaluating phenotype and co-segregation as dence types to support or refute a locus and show how that can be integrated into the Bayesian framework now used for variant fication and consistent with the 2015 guidelines.
Regulation of gene expression is a vital component of neurological homeostasis. Cataloging the consequences of endogenous gene expression on the physical structure and connectivity of the brain offers a means of unifying trait-associated genetic variation with trait-associated neurological features. We perform tissue-specific transcriptome-wide association studies (TWASs) on over 3,400 neuroimaging phenotypes in the UK Biobank (N N 1 / 4 33,224) using our joint-tissue imputation (JTI)-TWAS method. We identify highly significant associations between predicted expression for 7,192 genes and a wide variety of measures of the brain derived from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Our approach generates reproducible results in internal and external replication datasets. Genetically determined expression alone is sufficient for high-fidelity reconstruction of brain structure and organization. We demonstrate complementary benefits of cross-tissue and single-tissue analyses toward an integrated neurobiology and provide evidence that gene expression outside the central nervous system provides unique insights into brain health. As an application, we provide evidence suggesting that the genetically regulated expression of schizophrenia risk genes causally affects over 73% of neurological phenotypes that are altered in individuals with schizophrenia (as identified by neuroimaging studies). Imaging features associated with neuropsychiatric traits can provide valuable insights into underlying pathophysiology. By linking neuroimaging-derived phenotypes with expression levels of specific genes, this resource represents a powerful gene prioritization schema that can improve our understanding of brain function, development, and disease. The use of multiple different cortical and subcortical atlases in the resource facilitates direct integration of these data with findings from a diverse range of clinical neuroimaging studies.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have uncovered susceptibility loci associated with psychiatric disorders such as bipolar disorder (BP) and schizophrenia (SCZ). However, most of these loci are in non -coding regions of the genome, and the causal mechanisms of the link between genetic variation and disease risk is unknown. Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analysis of bulk tissue is a common approach used for deciphering underlying mechanisms, although this can obscure cell -type -specific signals and thus mask traitrelevant mechanisms. Although single -cell sequencing can be prohibitively expensive in large cohorts, computationally inferred celltype proportions and cell -type gene expression estimates have the potential to overcome these problems and advance mechanistic studies. Using bulk RNA-seq from 1,730 samples derived from whole blood in a cohort ascertained from individuals with BP and SCZ, this study estimated cell -type proportions and their relation with disease status and medication. For each cell type, we found between 2,875 and 4,629 eGenes (genes with an associated eQTL), including 1,211 that are not found on the basis of bulk expression alone. We performed a colocalization test between cell -type eQTLs and various traits and identified hundreds of associations that occur between cell -type eQTLs and GWASs but that are not detected in bulk eQTLs. Finally, we investigated the effects of lithium use on the regulation of cell -type expression loci and found examples of genes that are differentially regulated according to lithium use. Our study suggests that applying computational methods to large bulk RNA-seq datasets of non -brain tissue can identify disease -relevant, cell -type -specific biology of psychiatric disorders and psychiatric medication.
Zinc and RING finger 3 (ZNRF3) is a negative-feedback regulator of Wnt/(3-catenin signaling, which plays an important role in human brain development. Although somatically frequently mutated in cancer, germline variants in ZNRF3 have not been established as causative for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). We identified 12 individuals with ZNRF3 variants and various phenotypes via GeneMatcher/Decipher and evaluated genotype-phenotype correlation. We performed structural modeling and representative deleterious and control variants were assessed using in vitro transcriptional reporter assays with and without Wnt-ligand Wnt3a and/or Wnt-potentiator R-spondin (RSPO). Eight individuals harbored de novo missense variants and presented with NDD. We found missense variants associated with macrocephalic NDD to cluster in the RING ligase domain. Structural modeling predicted disruption of the ubiquitin ligase function likely compromising Wnt receptor turnover. Accordingly, the functional assays showed enhanced Wnt/(3-catenin signaling for these variants in a dominant negative manner. Contrarily, an individual with microcephalic NDD harbored a missense variant in the RSPO-binding domain predicted to disrupt binding affinity to RSPO and showed attenuated Wnt/(3-catenin signaling in the same assays. Additionally, four individuals harbored de novo truncating or de novo or inherited large in-frame deletion variants with non-NDD phenotypes, including heart, adrenal, or nephrotic problems. In contrast to NDD-associated missense variants, the effects on Wnt/(3-catenin signaling were comparable between the truncating variant and the empty vector and between benign variants and the wild type. In summary, we provide evidence for mirror brain size phenotypes caused by distinct pathomechanisms in Wnt/(3-catenin signaling through protein domain-specific deleterious ZNRF3 germline missense variants.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of complex traits is essential for developing targeted interventions. We analyzed liver expression quantitative-trait locus (eQTL) meta-analysis data on 1,183 participants to identify conditionally distinct signals. We found 9,013 eQTL signals for 6,564 genes; 23% of eGenes had two signals, and 6% had three or more signals. We then integrated the eQTL results with data from 29 cardiometabolic genome-wide association study (GWAS) traits and identified 1,582 GWAS-eQTL colocalizations for 747 eGenes. Non-primary eQTL signals accounted for 17% of all colocalizations. Isolating signals by conditional analysis prior to coloc resulted in 37% more colocalizations than using marginal eQTL and GWAS data, highlighting the importance of signal isolation. Isolating signals also led to stronger evidence of colocalization: among 343 eQTL-GWAS signal pairs in multi-signal regions, analyses that isolated the signals of interest resulted in higher posterior probability of colocalization for 41% of tests. Leveraging allelic heterogeneity, we predicted causal effects of gene expression on liver traits for four genes. To predict functional variants and regulatory elements, we colocalized eQTL with liver chromatin accessibility QTL (caQTL) and found 391 colocalizations, including 73 with non-primary eQTL signals and 60 eQTL signals that colocalized with both a caQTL and a GWAS signal. Finally, we used publicly available massively parallel reporter assays in HepG2 to highlight 14 eQTL signals that include at least one expression-modulating variant. This multi-faceted approach to unraveling the genetic underpinnings of liver-related traits could lead to therapeutic development.
We present a method for efficiently identifying clusters of identical -by -descent haplotypes in biobank-scale sequence data. Our multiindividual approach enables much more computationally efficient inference of identity by descent (IBD) than approaches that infer pairwise IBD segments and provides locus -specific IBD clusters rather than IBD segments. Our method's computation time, memory requirements, and output size scale linearly with the number of individuals in the dataset. We also present a method for using multi -individual IBD to detect alleles changed by gene conversion. Application of our methods to the autosomal sequence data for 125,361 White British individuals in the UK Biobank detects more than 9 million converted alleles. This is 2,900 times more alleles changed by gene conversion than were detected in a previous analysis of familial data. We estimate that more than 250,000 sequenced probands and a much larger number of additional genomes from multi -generational family members would be required to find a similar number of alleles changed by gene conversion using a family -based approach. Our IBD clustering method is implemented in the open -source ibdcluster software package.
The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery is essential for membrane remodeling and autophagy and it comprises three multi -subunit complexes (ESCRT I -III). We report nine individuals from six families presenting with a spectrum of neurodevelopmental/neurodegenerative features caused by bi-allelic variants in SNF8 (GenBank: NM_007241.4), encoding the ESCRT-II subunit SNF8. The phenotypic spectrum included four individuals with severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, massive reduction of white matter, hypo-/aplasia of the corpus callosum, neurodevelopmental arrest, and early death. A second cohort shows a milder phenotype with intellectual disability, childhood -onset optic atrophy, or ataxia. All mildly affected individuals shared the same hypomorphic variant, c.304G >A (p.Val102Ile). In patient -derived fibroblasts, bi-allelic SNF8 variants cause loss of ESCRT-II subunits. Snf8 loss of function in zebrafish results in global developmental delay and altered embryo morphology, impaired optic nerve development, and reduced forebrain size. In vivo experiments corroborated the pathogenicity of the tested SNF8 variants and their variable impact on embryo development, validating the observed clinical heterogeneity. Taken together, we conclude that loss of ESCRT-II due to bi-allelic SNF8 variants is associated with a spectrum of neurodevelopmental/neurodegenerative phenotypes mediated likely via impairment of the autophagic flux.
Genotype imputation is now fundamental for genome-wide association studies but lacks fairness due to the underrepresentation of references from non -European ancestries. The state-of-the-art imputation reference panel released by the Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) initiative improved the imputation of admixed African -ancestry and Hispanic/Latino samples, but imputation for populations primarily residing outside of North America may still fall short in performance due to persisting underrepresentation. To illustrate this point, we imputed the genotypes of over 43,000 individuals across 123 populations around the world and identified numerous populations where imputation accuracy paled in comparison to that of European -ancestry populations. For instance, the mean imputation r -squared (Rsq) for variants with minor allele frequencies between 1% and 5% in Saudi Arabians ( n = 1,061), Vietnamese ( n = 1,264), Thai ( n = 2,435), and Papua New Guineans ( n = 776) were 0.79, 0.78, 0.76, and 0.62, respectively, compared to 0.90-0.93 for comparable European populations matched in sample size and SNP array content. Outside of Africa and Latin America, Rsq appeared to decrease as genetic distances to European -ancestry reference increased, as predicted. Using sequencing data as ground truth, we also showed that Rsq may over -estimate imputation accuracy for non -European populations more than European populations, suggesting further disparity in accuracy between populations. Using 1,496 sequenced individuals from Taiwan Biobank as a second reference panel to TOPMed, we also assessed a strategy to improve imputation for non -European populations with meta -imputation, but this design did not improve accuracy across frequency spectra. Taken together, our analyses suggest that we must ultimately strive to increase diversity and size to promote equity within genetics research.
Mendelian randomization (MR) utilizes genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary data to infer causal relationships between exposures and outcomes, offering a valuable tool for identifying disease risk factors. Multivariable MR (MVMR) estimates the direct effects of multiple exposures on an outcome. This study tackles the issue of highly correlated exposures commonly observed in metabolomic data, a situation where existing MVMR methods often face reduced statistical power due to multicollinearity. We propose a robust extension of the MVMR framework that leverages constrained maximum likelihood (cML) and employs a Bayesian approach for identifying independent clusters of exposure signals. Applying our method to the UK Biobank metabolomic data for the largest Alzheimer disease (AD) cohort through a two-sample MR approach, we identified two independent signal clusters for AD: glutamine and lipids, with posterior inclusion probabilities (PIPs) of 95.0% and 81.5%, respectively. Our findings corroborate the hypothesized roles of glutamate and lipids in AD, providing quantitative support for their potential involvement.
Research on brain expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) has illuminated the genetic underpinnings of schizophrenia (SCZ). Yet mostof these studies have been centered on European populations, leading to a constrained understanding of population diversities and dis-ease risks. To address this gap, we examined genotype and RNA-seq data from African Americans (AA,n 1/4 158), Europeans (EUR,n 1/4 408), and East Asians (EAS,n 1/4 217). When comparing eQTLs between EUR and non-EUR populations, we observed concordant patternsof genetic regulatory effect, particularly in terms of the effect sizes of the eQTLs. However, 343,737cis-eQTLs linked to 1,276 genes and198,769 SNPs were found to be specific to non-EUR populations. Over 90% of observed population differences in eQTLs could be tracedback to differences in allele frequency. Furthermore, 35% of these eQTLs were notably rare in the EUR population. Integrating braineQTLs with SCZ signals from diverse populations, we observed a higher disease heritability enrichment of brain eQTLs in matched pop-ulations compared to mismatched ones. Prioritization analysis identified five risk genes (SFXN2,VPS37B,DENR,FTCDNL1, andNT5DC2) and three potential regulatory variants in known risk genes (CNNM2,MTRFR, andMPHOSPH9) that were missed in theEUR dataset. Our findings underscore that increasing genetic ancestral diversity is more efficient for power improvement than merelyincreasing the sample size within single-ancestry eQTLs datasets. Such a strategy will not only improve our understanding of the bio-logical underpinnings of population structures but also pave the way for the identification of risk genes in SCZ
Secondary structures are non-canonical arrangements of nucleic acids due to intra-strand interactions, including base pairing, stacking, or other higher-order features that deviate from the standard double-helical conformation. While these structures are extensively studied in RNA, they can also form when DNA becomes single stranded, creating topological roadblocks that can impact essential DNA-based processes such as replication, transcription, and repair, ultimately affecting genome stability. The availability of a complete linear sequence of human genomes, including repetitive loci, enables the prediction of DNA secondary structures comparing across various regions. Here, we evaluate the intrinsic properties of linear single-stranded DNA sequences derived from sampling specialized human loci such as centromeres, pericentromeres, ribosomal DNA (rDNA), and coding regions from the CHM13 genome. Our comparative analysis of predicted secondary structures across human chromosomes revealed the heightened presence, complexity, and instability of secondary structures within the centromere, which gradually decreased toward the pericentromere onto chromosomes' arms, on average lowest in coding regions. Notably, centromeric repeats exhibited the highest level of topological complexity within both the active and divergent domains, even when compared to other repetitive tandem satellites, such as rDNA in acrocentric chromosomes. Our findings provide evidence of the intrinsic self-hybridizing properties of centromere repeats, which are capable of generating complex topological structures that may functionally correlate with chromosome missegregation, especially when centromeric chromatin is disrupted. Processes such as long non-coding RNA transcription, recombination, and other mechanisms that dechromatinize and unwind stretches of linear DNA in these regions create in vivo opportunities for the DNA acrobatics hereby predicted.
Infectious agents contribute significantly to the global burden of diseases through both acute infection and their chronic sequelae. We leveraged the UK Biobank to identify genetic loci that influence humoral immune response to multiple infections. From 45 genomewide association studies in 9,611 participants from UK Biobank, we identified NFKB1 as a locus associated with quantitative antibody responses to multiple pathogens, including those from the herpes, retro-, and polyoma-virus families. An insertion -deletion variant thought to affect NFKB1 expression (rs28362491), was mapped as the likely causal variant and could play a key role in regulation of the immune response. Using 121 infection- and inflammation -related traits in 487,297 UK Biobank participants, we show that the deletion allele was associated with an increased risk of infection from diverse pathogens but had a protective effect against allergic disease. We propose that altered expression of NFKB1, as a result of the deletion, modulates hematopoietic pathways and likely impacts cell survival, antibody production, and inflammation. Taken together, we show that disruptions to the tightly regulated immune processes may tip the balance between exacerbated immune responses and allergy, or increased risk of infection and impaired resolution of inflammation.
Next -generation sequencing has revolutionized the speed of rare disease (RD) diagnoses. While clinical exome and genome sequencing represent an effective tool for many RD diagnoses, there is room to further improve the diagnostic odyssey of many RD patients. One recognizable intervention lies in increasing equitable access to genomic testing. Rural communities represent a significant portion of underserved and underrepresented individuals facing additional barriers to diagnosis and treatment. Primary care providers (PCPs) at local clinics, though sometimes suspicious of a potential benefit of genetic testing for their patients, have significant constraints in pursuing it themselves and rely on referrals to specialists. Yet, these referrals are typically followed by long waitlists and significant delays in clinical assessment, insurance clearance, testing, and initiation of diagnosis -informed care management. Not only is this process time intensive, but it also often requires multiple visits to urban medical centers for which distance may be a significant barrier to rural families. Therefore, providing early, "direct-to-provider"(DTP) local access to unrestrictive genomic testing is likely to help speed up diagnostic times and access to care for RD patients in rural communities. In a pilot study with a PCP clinic in rural Kansas, we observed a minimum 5.5 months shortening of time to diagnosis through the DTP exome sequencing program as compared to rural patients receiving genetic testing through the "traditional"PCP-referral-to-specialist scheme. We share our experience to encourage future partnerships beyond our center. Our efforts represent just one step in fostering greater diversity and equity in genomic studies.
To identify credible causal risk variants (CCVs) associated with different histotypes of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), we performed genome-wide association analysis for 470,825 genotyped and 10,163,797 imputed SNPs in 25,981 EOC cases and 105,724 controls of European origin. We identified five histotype-specific EOC risk regions (p value <5 x 10(-8)) and confirmed previously reported associations for 27 risk regions. Conditional analyses identified an additional 11 signals independent of the primary signal at six risk regions (p value <10(-5)). Fine mapping identified 4,008 CCVs in these regions, of which 1,452 CCVs were located in ovarian cancer-related chromatin marks with significant enrichment in active enhancers, active promoters, and active regions for CCVs from each EOC histotype. Transcriptome-wide association and colocalization analyses across histotypes using tissue-specific and cross-tissue datasets identified 86 candidate susceptibility genes in known EOC risk regions and 32 genes in 23 additional genomic regions that may represent novel EOC risk loci (false discovery rate <0.05). Finally, by integrating genome-wide HiChIP interactome analysis with transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS), variant effect predictor, transcription factor ChIP-seq, and motifbreakR data, we identified candidate gene-CCV interactions at each locus. This included risk loci where TWAS identified one or more candidate susceptibility genes (e.g., HOXD-AS2, HOXD8, and HOXD3 at 2q31) and other loci where no candidate gene was identified (e.g., MYC and PVT1 at 8q24) by TWAS. In summary, this study describes a functional framework and provides a greater understanding of the biological significance of risk alleles and candidate gene targets at EOC susceptibility loci identified by a genome-wide association study.
Co-observation of a gene variant with a pathogenic variant in another gene that explains the disease presentation has been designated as evidence against pathogenicity for commonly used variant classification guidelines. Multiple variant curation expert panels have specified, from consensus opinion, that this evidence type is not applicable for the classification of breast cancer predisposition gene variants. Statistical analysis of sequence data for 55,815 individuals diagnosed with breast cancer from the BRIDGES sequencing project was undertaken to formally assess the utility of co-observation data for germline variant classification. Our analysis included expected loss-of-function variants in 11 breast cancer predisposition genes and pathogenic missense variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53. We assessed whether co- observation of pathogenic variants in two different genes occurred more or less often than expected under the assumption of independence. Co-observation of pathogenic variants in each of BRCA1, BRCA2, and PALB2 with the remaining genes was less frequent than expected. This evidence for depletion remained after adjustment for age at diagnosis, study design (familial versus population-based), and country. Co-observation of a variant of uncertain significance in BRCA1, BRCA2, or PALB2 with a pathogenic variant in another breast cancer gene equated to supporting evidence against pathogenicity following criterion strength assignment based on the likelihood ratio and showed utility in reclassification of missense BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants identified in BRIDGES. Our approach has applicability for assessing the value of co-observation as a predictor of variant pathogenicity in other clinical contexts, including for gene-specific guidelines developed by ClinGen Variant Curation Expert Panels.
Mechanisms of abdominal obesity GWAS variants have remained largely unknown. To elucidate these mechanisms, we leveraged subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) single nucleus RNA-sequencing and genomics data. After discovering that heritability of abdominal obesity is enriched in adipocytes, we focused on a SAT unique adipocyte marker gene, the transcription factor TBX15, and its abdominal obesity-associated deleterious missense variant, rs10494217. The allele frequency of rs10494217 revealed a north-to-south decreasing gradient, with consistent significant F ST values observed for 25 different populations when compared to Finns, a population with a history of genetic isolation. Given the role of Tbx15 in mouse thermogenesis, the frequency may have increased as an adaptation to cold in Finns. Our selection analysis provided significant evidence of selection for the abdominal obesity risk allele T of rs10494217 in Finns, with a north-to-south decreasing trend in other populations, and demonstrated that latitude significantly predicts the allele frequency. We also discovered that the risk allele status significantly affects SAT adipocyte expression of multiple adipocyte marker genes in trans in two cohorts. Two of these trans genes have been connected to thermogenesis, supporting the thermogenic effect of the TBX15 missense variant as a possible cause of its selection. Adipose expression of one trans gene, a lncRNA, AC002066.1, was strongly associated with adipocyte size, implicating it in metabolically unhealthy adipocyte hypertrophy. In summary, the abdominal obesity variant rs10494217 was selected in Finns, and individuals with the risk allele have trans effects on adipocyte expression of genes relating to thermogenesis and adipocyte hypertrophy.
Primary proteasomopathies have recently emerged as a new class of rare early-onset neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) caused by pathogenic variants in the PSMB1 , PSMC1 , PSMC3 , or PSMD12 proteasome genes. Proteasomes are large multi-subunit protein complexes that maintain cellular protein homeostasis by clearing ubiquitin-tagged damaged, misfolded, or unnecessary proteins. In this study, we have identified PSMD11 as an additional proteasome gene in which pathogenic variation is associated with an NDD-causing proteasomopathy. PSMD11 loss-of-function variants caused early-onset syndromic intellectual disability and neurodevelopmental delay with recurrent obesity in 10 unrelated children. Our findings demonstrate that the cognitive impairment observed in these individuals could be recapitulated in Drosophila melanogaster with depletion of the PMSD11 ortholog Rpn6 , which compromised reversal learning. Our investigations in subject samples further revealed that PSMD11 loss of function resulted in impaired 26S proteasome assembly and the acquisition of a persistent type I interferon (IFN) gene signature, mediated by the integrated stress response (ISR) protein kinase R (PKR). In summary, these data identify PSMD11 as an additional member of the growing family of genes associated with neurodevelopmental proteasomopathies and provide insights into proteasomal biology in human health.
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an inherited disorder of vascular malformations characterized by mucocutaneous telangiectases and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) in internal organs. HHT is caused by inheritance of a loss of function mutation in one of three genes. Although individuals with HHT are haploinsufficient for one of these genes throughout their entire body, rather than exhibiting a systemic vascular phenotype, vascular malformations occur as focal lesions in discrete anatomic locations. The inconsistency between genotype and phenotype has provoked debate over whether haploinsufficiency or a different mechanism gives rise to the vascular malformations. We previously showed that HHT-associated skin telangiectases develop by a two-hit mutation mechanism in an HHT gene. However, somatic mutations were identified in only half of the telangiectases, raising the question whether a second-hit somatic mutation is a necessary (required) event in HHT pathogenesis. Here, we show that another mechanism for the second hit is loss of heterozygosity across the chromosome bearing the germline mutation. Secondly, we investigate the two-hit mutation mechanism for internal organ AVMs, the source of much of the morbidity of HHT. Here, we identified somatic molecular genetic events in eight liver telangiectases, including point mutations and a loss of heterozygosity event. We also identified somatic mutations in one pulmonary AVM and two brain AVMs, confirming that mucocutaneous and internal organ vascular malformations undergo the same molecular mechanisms. Together, these data argue that bi-allelic loss of function in an HHT gene is a required event in the pathogenesis of HHT-associated vascular malformations.
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common endocrine malignancy. 10% to 15% of individuals show familial clustering with three or more affected members, but the factors underlying this risk are unknown. In a group of recently studied individuals with POT1 pathogenic variants and ultra -long telomere length, PTC was the second most common solid tumor. We tested whether variants in POT1 and four other telomere-maintenance genes associated with familial cancer underlie PTC susceptibility. Among 470 individuals, we identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in three genes encoding telomere-binding proteins: POT1 , TINF2 , and ACD . They were found in 4.5% and 1.5% of familial and unselected cases, respectively. Individuals harboring these variants had ultra -long telomere length, and 15 of 18 (83%) developed other cancers, of which melanoma, lymphoma, and sarcoma were most common. Among individuals with PTC and melanoma, 22% carried a deleterious germline variant, suggesting that a long telomere syndrome might be clinically recognizable. Successive generations had longer telomere length than their parents and, at times, developed more cancers at younger ages. Tumor sequencing identified a single oncogenic driver, BRAF p.Val600Glu, in 10 of 10 tumors studied, but no telomere-maintenance mechanism, including at the TERT promoter. These data identify a syndromic subset of PTCs with locus heterogeneity and telomere lengthening as a convergent mechanism. They suggest these germline variants lower the threshold to cancer by obviating the need for an acquired telomere-maintenance mechanism in addition to sustaining the longevity of oncogenic mutations.
Individuals with obesity caused by biallelic pathogenic LEPR (leptin receptor) variants can benefit from setmelanotide, the novel MC4R agonist. An ongoing phase 3 clinical trial (NCT05093634) includes individuals with obesity who carry a heterozygous LEPR variant, although the obesogenic impact of these variants remains incompletely evaluated. The aim of this study was to functionally assess heterozygous variants in LEPR and to evaluate their effect on obesity. We sequenced LEPR in 10,000 participants from the French RaDiO study. We found 86 rare heterozygous variants. Each identified variant was then investigated in vitro using luciferase and western blot assays. Using the criteria of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), including the strong criterion related to functional assays, we found 12 pathogenic LEPR variants. Most heterozygotes did not present with obesity, and we found no association between these pathogenic variants and body mass index (BMI). This lack of association between pathogenic LEPR variants and obesity risk or BMI was confirmed using exome data from 200,000 individuals in the UK Biobank. In the literature, among 55 reported heterozygotes for of a rare pathogenic LEPR variant, only 27% had obesity. In conclusion, monoallelic pathogenic LEPR variants were functionally tested, and they do not elevate the risk of obesity or BMI levels. This raises questions about the use of setmelanotide, a costly drug with potential side effects, based solely on the presence of a heterozygous LEPR variant.
Recurrent copy-number variation represents one of the most well-established genetic drivers in neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder. Duplication of 15q11-q13 (dup15q) is a well-described neurodevelopmental syndrome that increases the risk of autism more than 40-fold. However, the effects of this duplication on gene expression and chromatin accessibility in specific cell types in the human brain remain unknown. To identify the cell-type-specific transcriptional and epigenetic effects of dup15q in the human frontal cortex, we conducted single-nucleus RNA sequencing and multi-omic sequencing on dup15q-affected individuals (n n 1 / 4 6) as well as individuals with non-dup15q autism (n n 1 / 4 7) and neurotypical control individuals (n n 1 / 4 7). Cell-type-specific differential expression analysis identified significantly regulated genes, critical biological pathways, and differentially accessible genomic regions. Although there was overall increased gene expression across the duplicated genomic region, cellular identity represented an important factor mediating gene-expression changes. As compared to other cell types, neuronal subtypes showed greater upregulation of gene expression across a critical region within the duplication. Genes that fell within the duplicated region and had high baseline expression in control individuals showed only modest changes in dup15q, regardless of cell type. Of note, dup15q and autism had largely distinct signatures of chromatin accessibility but shared the majority of transcriptional regulatory motifs, suggesting convergent biological pathways. However, the transcriptional binding-factor motifs implicated in each condition implicated distinct biological mechanisms: neuronal JUN and FOS networks in autism vs. an inflammatory transcriptional network in dup15q microglia. This work provides a cell-type-specific analysis of how dup15q changes gene expression and chromatin accessibility in the human brain, and it finds evidence of marked cell-type-specific effects of this genetic driver. These findings have implications for guiding therapeutic development in dup15q syndrome, as well as understanding the functional effects of copy-number variants more broadly in neurodevelopmental disorders.
We performed a series of integrative analyses including transcriptome-wide association studies (TWASs) and proteome-wide association studies (PWASs) of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) to nominate and prioritize molecular targets for laboratory investigation. On the basis of a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 29,020 affected individuals and 835,670 control individuals and prediction models trained in transcriptomic reference models, our TWAS across four kidney transcriptomes (GTEx kidney cortex, kidney tubules, TCGA-KIRC [The Cancer Genome Atlas kidney renal clear-cell carcinoma], and TCGA-KIRP [TCGA kidney renal papillary cell carcinoma]) identified 38 gene associations (false-discovery rate <5%) in at least two of four transcriptomic panels and identified 12 genes that were independent of GWAS susceptibility regions. Analyses combining TWAS associations across 48 tissues from GTEx identified associations that were replicable in tumor transcriptomes for 23 additional genes. Analyses by the two major histologic types (clear-cell RCC and papillary RCC) revealed subtype-specific associations, although at least three gene associations were common to both subtypes. PWAS identified 13 associated proteins, all mapping to GWAS-significant loci. TWAS-identified genes were enriched for active enhancer or promoter regions in RCC tumors and hypoxia-inducible factor binding sites in relevant cell lines. Using gene expression correlation, common cancers (breast and prostate) and RCC risk factors (e.g., hypertension and BMI) display genetic contributions shared with RCC. Our work identifies potential molecular targets for RCC susceptibility for downstream functional investigation.
Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) are an important tool for understanding the role of common genetic variants in human disease. Standard best practices recommend that PRSs be analyzed in cohorts that are independent of the genome-wide association study (GWAS) used to derive the scores without sample overlap or relatedness between the two cohorts. However, identifying sample overlap and relatedness can be challenging in an era of GWASs performed by large biobanks and international research consortia. Although most genomics researchers are aware of best practices and theoretical concerns about sample overlap and relatedness between GWAS and PRS cohorts, the prevailing assumption is that the risk of bias is small for very large GWASs. Here, we present two real-world examples demonstrating that sample overlap and relatedness is not a minor or theoretical concern but an important potential source of bias in PRS studies. Using a recently developed statistical adjustment tool, we found that excluding overlapping and related samples was equal to or more powerful than adjusting for overlap bias. Our goal is to make genomics researchers aware of the magnitude of risk of bias from sample overlap and relatedness and to highlight the need for mitigation tools, including independent validation cohorts in PRS studies, continued development of statistical adjustment methods, and tools for researchers to test their cohorts for overlap and relatedness with GWAS cohorts without sharing individual-level data.
Congenital microcoria (MCOR) is a rare hereditary developmental defect of the iris dilator muscle frequently associated with high axial myopia and high intraocular pressure (IOP) glaucoma. The condition is caused by submicroscopic rearrangements of chromosome 13q32.1. However, the mechanisms underlying the failure of iris development and the origin of associated features remain elusive. Here, we present a 3D architecture model of the 13q32.1 region, demonstrating that MCOR-related deletions consistently disrupt the boundary between two topologically associating domains (TADs). Deleting the critical MCOR-causing region in mice reveals ectopic Sox21 expression precisely aligning with Dct, each located in one of the two neighbor TADs. This observation is consistent with the TADs' boundary alteration and adoption of Dct regulatory elements by the Sox21 promoter. Additionally, we identify Tgfb2 as a target gene of SOX21 and show TGFB2 accumulation in the aqueous humor of an MCOR-affected subject. Accumulation of TGFB2 is recognized for its role in glaucoma and potential impact on axial myopia. Our results highlight the importance of SOX21-TGFB2 signaling in iris development and control of eye growth and IOP. Insights from MCOR studies may provide therapeutic avenues for this condition but also for glaucoma and high myopia conditions, affecting millions of people.
Age-related hearing loss (ARHL) is a major health concern among the elderly population. It is hoped that increasing our understanding of its underlying pathophysiological processes will lead to the development of novel therapies. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) discovered a few dozen genetic variants in association with elevated risk for ARHL. Integrated analysis of GWAS results and transcriptomics data is a powerful approach for elucidating specific cell types that are involved in disease pathogenesis. Intriguingly, recent studies that applied such bioinformatics approaches to ARHL resulted in disagreeing findings as for the key cell types that are most strongly linked to the genetic pathogenesis of ARHL. These conflicting studies pointed either to cochlear sensory epithelial or to stria vascularis cells as the cell types most prominently involved in the genetic basis of ARHL. Seeking to resolve this discrepancy, we integrated the analysis of four ARHL GWAS datasets with four independent inner-ear single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets. Our analysis clearly points to the cochlear sensory epithelial cells as the key cells for the genetic predisposition to ARHL. We also explain the limitation of the bioinformatics analysis performed by previous studies that led to missing the enrichment for ARHL GWAS signal in sensory epithelial cells. Collectively, we show that cochlear epithelial cells, not stria vascularis cells, are the main inner-ear cells related to the genetic pathogenesis of ARHL.
The pathological huntingtin ( HTT ) trinucleotide repeat underlying Huntington disease (HD) continues to expand throughout life. Repeat length correlates both with earlier age at onset (AaO) and faster progression, making slowing its expansion an attractive therapeutic approach. Genome-wide association studies have identified candidate variants associated with altered AaO and progression, with many found in DNA mismatch repair (MMR)-associated genes. We examine whether lowering expression of these genes affects the rate of repeat expansion in human ex vivo models using HD iPSCs and HD iPSC-derived striatal medium spiny neuron -enriched cultures. We have generated a stable CRISPR interference HD iPSC line in which we can specifically and efficiently lower gene expression from a donor carrying over 125 CAG repeats. Lowering expression of each member of the MMR complexes MutS (MSH2, MSH3, and MSH6), MutL (MLH1, PMS1, PMS2, and MLH3), and LIG1 resulted in characteristic MMR deficiencies. Reduced MSH2, MSH3, and MLH1 slowed repeat expansion to the largest degree, while lowering either PMS1, PMS2, or MLH3 slowed it to a lesser degree. These effects were recapitulated in iPSC-derived striatal cultures where MutL factor expression was lowered. CRISPRi-mediated lowering of key MMR factor expression to levels feasibly achievable by current therapeutic approaches was able to effectively slow the expansion of the HTT CAG tract. We highlight members of the MutL family as potential targets to slow pathogenic repeat expansion with the aim to delay onset and progression of HD and potentially other repeat expansion disorders exhibiting somatic instability.
Large language models (LLMs) are generating interest in medical settings. For example, LLMs can respond coherently to medical queries by providing plausible differential diagnoses based on clinical notes. However, there are many questions to explore, such as evaluating differences between open- and closed-source LLMs as well as LLM performance on queries from both medical and non-medical users. In this study, we assessed multiple LLMs, including Llama-2-chat, Vicuna, Medllama2, Bard/Gemini, Claude, ChatGPT3.5, and ChatGPT-4, as well as non-LLM approaches (Google search and Phenomizer) regarding their ability to identify genetic conditions from textbook-like clinician questions and their corresponding layperson translations related to 63 genetic conditions. For open-source LLMs, larger models were more accurate than smaller LLMs: 7b, 13b, and larger than 33b parameter models obtained accuracy ranges from 21%-49%, 41%-51%, and 54%-68%, respectively. Closed-source LLMs outperformed open-source LLMs, with ChatGPT-4 performing best (89%-90%). Three of 11 LLMs and Google search had significant performance gaps between clinician and layperson prompts. We also evaluated how in-context prompting and keyword removal affected open-source LLM performance. Models were provided with 2 types of in-context prompts: list-type prompts, which improved LLM performance, and definition-type prompts, which did not. We further analyzed removal of rare terms from descriptions, which decreased accuracy for 5 of 7 evaluated LLMs. Finally, we observed much lower performance with real individuals' descriptions; LLMs answered these questions with a maximum 21% accuracy.
In 2020, the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) made ten "bold predictions,"including that "the clinical relevance of all encountered genomic variants will be readily predictable, rendering the diagnostic designation 'variant of uncertain significance (VUS)' obsolete."We discuss the prospects for this prediction, arguing that many, if not most, VUS in coding regions will be resolved by 2030. We outline a confluence of recent changes making this possible, especially advances in the standards for variant classification that better leverage diverse types of evidence, improvements in computational variant effect predictor performance, scalable multiplexed assays of variant effect capable of saturating the genome, and data -sharing efforts that will maximize the information gained from each new individual sequenced and variant interpreted. We suggest that clinicians and researchers can realize a future where VUSs have largely been eliminated, in line with the NHGRI's bold prediction. The length of time taken to reach this future, and thus whether we are able to achieve the goal of largely eliminating VUSs by 2030, is largely a consequence of the choices made now and in the next few years. We believe that investing in eliminating VUSs is worthwhile, since their predominance remains one of the biggest challenges to precision genomic medicine.
Changes in gene regulatory elements play critical roles in human phenotypic divergence. However, identifying the base -pair changes responsible for the distinctive morphology of Homo sapiens remains challenging. Here, we report a noncoding single -nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs41298798, as a potential causal variant contributing to the morphology of the skull base and vertebral structures found in Homo sapiens . Screening for differentially regulated genes between Homo sapiens and extinct relatives revealed 13 candidate genes associated with basicranial development, with TBX1 , implicated in DiGeorge syndrome, playing a pivotal role. Epigenetic markers and in silico analyses prioritized rs41298798 within a TBX1 intron for functional validation. CRISPR editing revealed that the 41 -basepair region surrounding rs41298798 modulates gene expression at 22q11.21. The derived allele of rs41298798 acts as an allele -specific enhancer mediated by E2F1, resulting in increased TBX1 expression levels compared to the ancestral allele. Tbx1 -knockout mice exhibited skull base and vertebral abnormalities similar to those seen in DiGeorge syndrome. Phenotypic differences associated with TBX1 deficiency are observed between Homo sapiens and Neanderthals ( Homo neanderthalensis ). In conclusion, the regulatory divergence of TBX1 contributes to the formation of skull base and vertebral structures found in Homo sapiens .
Splicing -based transcriptome-wide association studies (splicing-TWASs) of breast cancer have the potential to identify susceptibility genes. However, existing splicing-TWASs test the association of individual excised introns in breast tissue only and thus have limited power to detect susceptibility genes. In this study, we performed a multi -tissue joint splicing-TWAS that integrated splicing-TWAS signals of multiple excised introns in each gene across 11 tissues that are potentially relevant to breast cancer risk. We utilized summary statistics from a meta -analysis that combined genome-wide association study (GWAS) results of 424,650 women of European ancestry. Splicing level prediction models were trained in GTEx (v.8) data. We identified 240 genes by the multi -tissue joint splicing-TWAS at the Bonferroni-corrected significance level; in the tissue -specific splicing-TWAS that combined TWAS signals of excised introns in genes in breast tissue only, we identified nine additional significant genes. Of these 249 genes, 88 genes in 62 loci have not been reported by previous TWASs, and 17 genes in seven loci are at least 1 Mb away from published GWAS index variants. By comparing the results of our splicingTWASs with previous gene -expression -based TWASs that used the same summary statistics and expression prediction models trained the same reference panel, we found that 110 genes in 70 loci that are identified only by the splicing-TWASs. Our results showed that many genes, expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) did not show a significant impact on breast cancer risk, whereas splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTL) showed a strong impact through intron excision events.
The human reference genome (GRCh38), primarily sourced from individuals of European descent, falls short in capturing the vast genetic diversity across global populations. Efforts to diversify the reference genome face challenges in accessibility and representation, exacerbating the scarcity of African genomic data crucial for studying diseases prevalent in these populations. Sherman et al. proposed constructing reference genomes tailored to distinct human sub-populations. Their African Pan-Genome initiative highlighted substantial genetic variation missing from the GRCh38 human reference genome, emphasizing the necessity for population-specific genomes. In response, local initiatives like the Senegalese Genome project (SEN-GENOME) have emerged to document the genomes of historically overlooked populations. SEN-GENOME embodies community-driven decentralized research. With meticulous recruitment criteria and ethical practices, it aims to sequence 1,000 genomes from 31 ethnolinguistic groups, in the fourteen administrative regions of Senegal, fostering local genomic research tailored to the region. The key to SEN-GENOME's success is its commitment to local governance of data, capacity building, and integration with broader pan-genome projects in Africa. Despite the complexities of data harmonization and sharing, our collaborative efforts are aligned with common goals, ensuring steady progress toward a comprehensive human pan-genome. We invite and welcome collaboration with other research entities to achieve this shared vision. In summary, local initiatives such as SEN-GENOME are pivotal in bridging genomic disparities, offering pathways to equitable and inclusive genomic research. Collaborative endeavors guided by a collective vision for human health will propel us toward a more encompassing understanding of the human genome and better health through genomic medicine.
The tumor suppressor CHEK2 encodes the serine/threonine protein kinase CHK2 which, upon DNA damage, is important for pausing the cell cycle, initiating DNA repair, and inducing apoptosis. CHK2 phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor BRCA1 is also important for mitotic spindle assembly and chromosomal stability. Consistent with its cell-cycle checkpoint role, both germline and somatic variants in CHEK2 have been linked to breast and other cancers. Over 90% of clinical germline CHEK2 missense variants are classified as variants of uncertain significance, complicating diagnosis of CHK2-dependent cancer. We therefore sought to test the functional impact of all possible missense variants in CHK2. Using a scalable multiplexed assay based on the ability of human CHK2 to complement DNA sensitivity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells lacking the CHEK2 ortholog, RAD53, we generated a systematic "missense variant effect map" for CHEK2 missense variation. The map reflects known biochemical features of CHK2 while offering new biological insights. It also provides strong evidence toward pathogenicity for some clinical missense variants and supporting evidence toward benignity for others. Overall, this comprehensive missense variant effect map contributes to understanding of both known and yet-to-be-observed CHK2 variants.
Pathogenic variants in the JAG1 gene are a primary cause of the multi-system disorder Alagille syndrome. Although variant detection rates are high for this disease, there is uncertainty associated with the classification of missense variants that leads to reduced diagnostic yield. Consequently, up to 85% of reported JAG1 missense variants have uncertain or conflicting classifications. We generated a library of 2,832 JAG1 nucleotide variants within exons 1-7, a region with a high number of reported missense variants, and designed a high- throughput assay to measure JAG1 membrane expression, a requirement for normal function. After calibration using a set of 175 known or predicted pathogenic and benign variants included within the variant library, 486 variants were characterized as functionally abnormal (n n 1 / 4 277 abnormal and n 1 / 4 209 likely abnormal), of which 439 (90.3%) were missense. We identified divergent membrane expression occurring at specific residues, indicating that loss of the wild-type residue itself does not drive pathogenicity, a finding supported by structural modeling data and with broad implications for clinical variant classification both for Alagille syndrome and globally across other disease genes. Of 144 uncertain variants reported in patients undergoing clinical or research testing, 27 had functionally abnormal membrane expression, and inclusion of our data resulted in the reclassification of 26 to likely pathogenic. Functional evidence augments the classification of genomic variants, reducing uncertainty and improving diagnostics. Inclusion of this repository of functional evidence during JAG1 variant reclassification will significantly affect resolution of variant pathogenicity, making a critical impact on the molecular diagnosis of Alagille syndrome.
Microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 2 (MARK2) contributes to establishing neuronal polarity and developing dendritic spines. Although large-scale sequencing studies have associated MARK2 variants with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), the clinical features and variant spectrum in affected individuals with MARK2 variants, early developmental phenotypes in mutant human neurons, and the pathogenic mechanism underlying effects on neuronal development have remained unclear. Here, we report 31 individuals with MARK2 variants and presenting with ASD, other neurodevelopmental disorders, and distinctive facial features. Loss-of-function (LoF) variants predominate (81%) in affected individuals, while computational analysis and in vitro expression assay of missense variants supported the effect of MARK2 loss. Using proband-derived and CRISPR-engineered isogenic induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), we show that MARK2 loss leads to early neuronal developmental and functional deficits, including anomalous polarity and dis-organization in neural rosettes, as well as imbalanced proliferation and differentiation in neural progenitor cells (NPCs). Mark2+/- mice showed abnormal cortical formation and partition and ASD-like behavior. Through the use of RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and lithium treatment, we link MARK2 loss to downregulation of the WNT/b-catenin signaling pathway and identify lithium as a potential drug for treating MARK2-associated ASD.
Mendelian randomization uses genetic variants as instrumental variables to make causal inferences on the effect of an exposure on an outcome. Due to the recent abundance of high-powered genome-wide association studies, many putative causal exposures of interest have large numbers of independent genetic variants with which they associate, each representing a potential instrument for use in a Mendelian randomization analysis. Such polygenic analyses increase the power of the study design to detect causal effects; however, they also increase the potential for bias due to instrument invalidity. Recent attention has been given to dealing with bias caused by correlated pleiotropy, which results from violation of the "instrument strength independent of direct effect"assumption. Although methods have been proposed that can account for this bias, a number of restrictive conditions remain in many commonly used techniques. In this paper, we propose a Bayesian framework for Mendelian randomization that provides valid causal inference under very general settings. We propose the methods MR -Horse and MVMR-Horse, which can be performed without access to individual -level data, using only summary statistics of the type commonly published by genome-wide association studies, and can account for both correlated and uncorrelated pleiotropy. In simulation studies, we show that the approach retains type I error rates below nominal levels even in high-pleiotropy scenarios. We demonstrate the proposed approaches in applied examples in both univariable and multivariable settings, some with very weak instruments.
The term "recurrent constellations of embryonic malformations"(RCEM) is used to describe a number of multiple malformation associations that affect three or more body structures. The causes of these disorders are currently unknown, and no diagnostic marker has been identified. Consequently, providing a definitive diagnosis in suspected individuals is challenging. In this study, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis was conducted on DNA samples obtained from the peripheral blood of 53 individuals with RCEM characterized by clinical features recognized as VACTERL and/or oculoauriculovertebral spectrum association. We identified a common DNA methylation episignature in 40 out of the 53 individuals. Subsequently, a sensitive and specific binary classifier was developed based on the DNA methylation episignature. This classifier can facilitate the use of RCEM episignature as a diagnostic biomarker in a clinical setting. The study also investigated the functional correlation of RCEM DNA methylation relative to other genetic disorders with known episignatures, highlighting the common genomic regulatory pathways involved in the pathophysiology of RCEM.
Cyclin D2 (CCND2) stabilization underpins a range of macrocephaly-associated disorders through mutation of CCND2 or activating mutations in upstream genes encoding PI3K-AKT pathway components. Here, we describe three individuals with overlapping macrocephaly-associated phenotypes who carry the same recurrent de novo c.179G>A (p.Arg60Gln) variant in Myc-associated factor X (MAX). The mutation, located in the b-HLH-LZ domain, causes increased intracellular CCND2 through increased transcription but it does not cause stabilization of CCND2. We show that the purified b-HLH-LZ domain of MAX(Arg60Gln) (Max*(Arg60Gln)) binds its target E-box sequence with a lower apparent affinity. This leads to a more efficient heterodimerization with c-Myc resulting in an increase in transcriptional activity of c-Myc in individuals carrying this mutation. The recent development of Omomyc-CPP, a cell-penetrating b-HLH-LZ-domain c-Myc inhibitor, provides a possible therapeutic option for MAX(Arg60Gln) individuals, and others carrying similar germline mutations resulting in dysregulated transcriptional c-Myc activity.
Brain imaging and genomics are critical tools enabling characterization of the genetic basis of brain disorders. However, imaging large cohorts is expensive and may be unavailable for legacy datasets used for genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Using an integrated feature selection/aggregation model, we developed an image -mediated association study (IMAS), which utilizes borrowed imaging/genomics data to conduct association mapping in legacy GWAS cohorts. By leveraging the UK Biobank image -derived phenotypes (IDPs), the IMAS discovered genetic bases underlying four neuropsychiatric disorders and verified them by analyzing annotations, pathways, and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). A cerebellar -mediated mechanism was identified to be common to the four disorders. Simulations show that, if the goal is identifying genetic risk, our IMAS is more powerful than a hypothetical protocol in which the imaging results were available in the GWAS dataset. This implies the feasibility of reanalyzing legacy GWAS datasets without conducting additional imaging, yielding cost savings for integrated analysis of genetics and imaging.
Transcriptome-wide association studies (TWASs) have investigated the role of genetically regulated transcriptional activity in the etiologies of breast and ovarian cancer. However, methods performed to date have focused on the regulatory effects of risk -associated SNPs thought to act in cis on a nearby target gene. With growing evidence for distal ( trans ) regulatory effects of variants on gene expression, we performed TWASs of breast and ovarian cancer using a Bayesian genome-wide TWAS method (BGW-TWAS) that considers effects of both cis - and trans -expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). We applied BGW-TWAS to whole-genome and RNA sequencing data in breast and ovarian tissues from the Genotype -Tissue Expression project to train expression imputation models. We applied these models to large-scale GWAS summary statistic data from the Breast Cancer and Ovarian Cancer Association Consortia to identify genes associated with risk of overall breast cancer, non-mucinous epithelial ovarian cancer, and 10 cancer subtypes. We identified 101 genes significantly associated with risk with breast cancer phenotypes and 8 with ovarian phenotypes. These loci include established risk genes and several novel candidate risk loci, such as ACAP3 , whose associations are predominantly driven by trans -eQTLs. We replicated several associations using summary statistics from an independent GWAS of these cancer phenotypes. We further used genotype and expression data in normal and tumor breast tissue from the Cancer Genome Atlas to examine the performance of our trained expression imputation models. This work represents an in-depth look into the role of trans eQTLs in the complex molecular mechanisms underlying these diseases.
The neurodevelopmental disorders Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Schaaf-Yang syndrome (SYS) both arise from genomic alterations within human chromosome 15q11-q13. A deletion of the SNORD116 cluster, encoding small nucleolar RNAs, or frameshift mutations within MAGEL2 result in closely related phenotypes in individuals with PWS or SYS, respectively. By investigation of their subcellular localization, we observed that in contrast to a predominant cytoplasmic localization of wild-type (WT) MAGEL2, a truncated MAGEL2 mutant was evenly distributed between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. To elucidate regulatory pathways that may underlie both diseases, we identified protein interaction partners for WT or mutant MAGEL2, in particular the survival motor neuron protein (SMN), involved in spinal muscular atrophy, and the fragile-X-messenger ribonucleoprotein (FMRP), involved in autism spectrum disorders. The interactome of the non-coding RNA SNORD116 was also investigated by RNA-CoIP. We show that WT and truncated MAGEL2 were both involved in RNA metabolism, while regulation of transcription was mainly observed for WT MAGEL2. Hence, we investigated the influence of MAGEL2 mutations on the expression of genes from the PWS locus, including the SNORD116 cluster. Thereby, we provide evidence for MAGEL2 mutants decreasing the expression of SNORD116 , SNORD115 , and SNORD109A , as well as protein-coding genes MKRN3 and SNRPN , thus bridging the gap between PWS and SYS.
Obesity is a major risk factor for a myriad of diseases, affecting >600 million people worldwide. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified hundreds of genetic variants that influence body mass index (BMI), a commonly used metric to assess obesity risk. Most variants are non-coding and likely act through regulating genes nearby. Here, we apply multiple computational methods to prioritize the likely causal gene(s) within each of the 536 previously reported GWAS-identified BMI-associated loci. We performed summary-data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR), FINEMAP, DEPICT, MAGMA, transcriptome-wide association studies (TWASs), mutation significance cutoff (MSC), polygenic priority score (PoPS), and the nearest gene strategy. Results of each method were weighted based on their success in identifying genes known to be implicated in obesity, ranking all prioritized genes according to a confidence score (minimum: 0; max: 28). We identified 292 high-scoring genes (R11) in 264 loci, including genes known to play a role in body weight regulation (e.g., DGKI , ANKRD26 , MC4R , LEPR , BDNF , GIPR , AKT3 , KAT8 , MTOR) and genes related to comorbidities (e.g., FGFR1 , ISL1 , TFAP2B , PARK2 , TCF7L2 , GSK3B). For most of the high-scoring genes, however, we found limited or no evidence for a role in obesity, including the top-scoring gene BPTF . Many of the top-scoring genes seem to act through a neuronal regulation of body weight, whereas others affect peripheral pathways, including circadian rhythm, insulin secretion, and glucose and carbohydrate homeostasis. The characterization of these likely causal genes can increase our understanding of the underlying biology and offer avenues to develop therapeutics for weight loss.
Recent studies have highlighted the essential role of RNA splicing, a key mechanism of alternative RNA processing, in establishing connections between genetic variations and disease. Genetic loci influencing RNA splicing variations show considerable influence on complex traits, possibly surpassing those affecting total gene expression. Dysregulated RNA splicing has emerged as a major potential contributor to neurological and psychiatric disorders, likely due to the exceptionally high prevalence of alternatively spliced genes in the human brain. Nevertheless, establishing direct associations between genetically altered splicing and complex traits has remained an enduring challenge. We introduce Spliced-Transcriptome-Wide Associations (SpliTWAS) to integrate alternative splicing information with genome-wide association studies to pinpoint genes linked to traits through exon splicing events. We applied SpliTWAS to two schizophrenia (SCZ) RNA-sequencing datasets, BrainGVEX and CommonMind, revealing 137 and 88 trait-associated exons (in 84 and 67 genes), respectively. Enriched biological functions in the associated gene sets converged on neuronal function and development, immune cell activation, and cellular transport, which are highly relevant to SCZ. SpliTWAS variants impacted RNA-binding protein binding sites, revealing potential disruption of RNA-protein interactions affecting splicing. We extended the probabilistic fine-mapping method FOCUS to the exon level, identifying 36 genes and 48 exons as putatively causal for SCZ. We highlight VPS45 and APOPT1, where splicing of specific exons was associated with disease risk, eluding detection by conventional gene expression analysis. Collectively, this study supports the substantial role of alternative splicing in shaping the genetic basis of SCZ, providing a valuable approach for future investigations in this area.
Variants of uncertain significance (VUSs) in BRCA2 are a common result of hereditary cancer genetic testing. While more than 4,000 unique VUSs, comprised of missense or intronic variants, have been identified in BRCA2, the few missense variants now classified clinically as pathogenic or likely pathogenic are predominantly located in the region encoding the C -terminal DNA binding domain (DBD). We report on functional evaluation of the influence of 462 BRCA2 missense variants affecting the DBD on DNA repair activity of BRCA2 using a homology -directed DNA double -strand break repair assay. Of these, 137 were functionally abnormal, 313 were functionally normal, and 12 demonstrated intermediate function. Comparisons with other functional studies of BRCA2 missense variants yielded strong correlations. Sequencebased in silico prediction models had high sensitivity, but limited specificity, relative to the homology -directed repair assay. Combining the functional results with clinical and genetic data in an American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG)/Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) -like variant classification framework from a clinical testing laboratory, after excluding known splicing variants and functionally intermediate variants, classified 431 of 442 (97.5%) missense variants (129 as pathogenic/likely pathogenic and 302 as benign/likely benign). Functionally abnormal variants classified as pathogenic by ACMG/AMP rules were associated with a slightly lower risk of breast cancer (odds ratio [OR] 5.15, 95% confidence interval [CI] 3.43-7.83) than BRCA2 DBD protein truncating variants (OR 8.56, 95% CI 6.03-12.36). Overall, functional studies of BRCA2 variants using validated assays substantially improved the variant classification yield from ACMG/AMP models and are expected to improve clinical management of many individuals found to harbor germline BRCA2 missense VUS.
Transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) tools have been applied to conduct proteome-wide association studies (PWASs) by integrating proteomics data with genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary data. The genetic effects of PWAS-identified significant genes are potentially mediated through genetically regulated protein abundance, thus informing the underlying disease mechanisms better than GWAS loci. However, existing TWAS/PWAS tools are limited by considering only one statistical model. We propose an omnibus PWAS pipeline to account for multiple statistical models and demonstrate improved performance by simulation and application studies of Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia. We employ the Aggregated Cauchy Association Test to derive omnibus PWAS (PWAS-O) p values from PWAS p values obtained by three existing tools assuming complementary statistical models-TIGAR, PrediXcan, and FUSION. Our simulation studies demonstrated improved power, with well-calibrated type I error, for PWAS-O over all three individual tools. We applied PWAS-O to studying AD dementia with reference proteomic data profiled from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of postmortem brains from individuals of European ancestry. We identified 43 risk genes, including 5 not identified by previous studies, which are interconnected through a protein-protein interaction network that includes the well-known AD risk genes TOMM40, APOC1, and APOC2. We also validated causal genetic effects mediated through the proteome for 27 (63%) PWAS-O risk genes, providing insights into the underlying biological mechanisms of AD dementia and highlighting promising targets for therapeutic development. PWAS-O can be easily applied to studying other complex diseases.
Mendelian randomization (MR), which utilizes genetic variants as instrumental variables (IVs), has gained popularity as a method for causal inference between phenotypes using genetic data. While efforts have been made to relax IV assumptions and develop new methods for causal inference in the presence of invalid IVs due to confounding, the reliability of MR methods in real-world applications remains uncertain. Instead of using simulated datasets, we conducted a benchmark study evaluating 16 two-sample summary-level MR methods using real-world genetic datasets to provide guidelines for the best practices. Our study focused on the following crucial aspects: type I error control in the presence of various confounding scenarios (e.g., population stratification, pleiotropy, and family-level confounders like assortative mating), the accuracy of causal effect estimates, replicability, and power. By comprehensively evaluating the performance of compared methods over one thousand exposure-outcome trait pairs, our study not only provides valuable insights into the performance and limitations of the compared methods but also offers practical guidance for researchers to choose appropriate MR methods for causal inference.
The impact of tobacco exposure on health varies by race and ethnicity and is closely tied to internal nicotine dose, a marker of carcinogen uptake. DNA methylation is strongly responsive to smoking status and may mediate health effects, but study of associations with internal dose is limited. We performed a blood leukocyte epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) of urinary total nicotine equivalents (TNEs; a measure of nicotine uptake) and DNA methylation measured using the MethylationEPIC v1.0 BeadChip (EPIC) in six racial and ethnic groups across three cohort studies. In the Multiethnic Cohort Study (discovery, n = 1994), TNEs were associated with differential methylation at 408 CpG sites across >250 genomic regions (p < 9 x 10(-8)). The top significant sites were annotated to AHRR, F2RL3, RARA, GPR15, PRSS23, and 2q37.1, all of which had decreasing methylation with increasing TNEs. We identified 45 novel CpG sites, of which 42 were unique to the EPIC array and eight annotated to genes not previously linked with smoking-related DNA methylation. The most significant signal in a novel gene was cg03748458 in MIR383;SGCZ. Fifty-one of the 408 discovery sites were validated in the Singapore Chinese Health Study (n = 340) and the Southern Community Cohort Study (n = 394) (Bonferroni corrected p < 1.23 x 10(-4)). Significant heterogeneity by race and ethnicity was detected for CpG sites in MYO1G and CYTH1. Furthermore, TNEs significantly mediated the association between cigarettes per day and DNA methylation at 15 sites (average 22.5%-44.3% proportion mediated). Our multiethnic study highlights the transethnic and ethnic-specific methylation associations with internal nicotine dose, a strong predictor of smoking-related morbidities.
One of the regulatory mechanisms influencing the functional capacity of genes is alternative splicing (AS). Previous studies exploring the splicing landscape of human tissues have shown that AS has contributed to human biology, especially in disease progression and the immune response. Nonetheless, this phenomenon remains poorly characterized across human populations, and it is unclear how genetic and environmental variation contribute to AS. Here, we examine a set of 115 Indonesian samples from three traditional island populations spanning the genetic ancestry cline that characterizes Island Southeast Asia. We conduct a global AS analysis between islands to ascertain the degree of functionally significant AS events and their consequences. Using an event-based statistical model, we detected over 1,500 significant differential AS events across all comparisons. Additionally, we identify over 6,000 genetic variants associated with changes in splicing (splicing quantitative trait loci [sQTLs]), some of which are driven by Papuan-like genetic ancestry, and only show partial overlap with other publicly available sQTL datasets derived from other populations. Computational predictions of RNA binding activity reveal that a fraction of these sQTLs directly modulate the binding propensity of proteins involved in the splicing regulation of immune genes. Overall, these results contribute toward elucidating the role of genetic variation in shaping gene regulation in one of the most diverse regions in the world.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a Mendelian disease characterized by gradual loss of vision, due to the progressive degeneration of retinal cells. Genetically, it is highly heterogeneous, with pathogenic variants identified in more than 100 genes so far. Following a large-scale sequencing screening, we identified five individuals (four families) with recessive and non-syndromic RP, carrying as well bi-allelic DNA changes in COQ8B, a gene involved in the biosynthesis of coenzyme Q10. Specifically, we detected compound heterozygous assortments of five disease-causing variants (c.187C>T [p.Arg63Trp], c.566G>A [p.Trp189Ter], c.1156G>A [p.Asp386Asn], c.1324G>A [p.Val442Met], and c.1560G>A [p.Trp520Ter]), all segregating with disease according to a recessive pattern of inheritance. Cell-based analysis of recombinant proteins deriving from these genotypes, performed by target engagement assays, showed in all cases a significant decrease in ligand-protein interaction compared to the wild type. Our results indicate that variants in COQ8B lead to recessive non-syndromic RP, possibly by impairing the biosynthesis of coenzyme Q10, a key component of oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria.
Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) is a recessive metabolic disorder caused by variants in ASL . In an essential step in urea synthesis, ASL breaks down argininosuccinate (ASA), a pathognomonic ASLD biomarker. The severe disease forms lead to hyperammonemia, neurological injury, and even early death. The current treatments are unsatisfactory, involving a strict low -protein diet, arginine supplementation, nitrogen scavenging, and in some cases, liver transplantation. An unmet need exists for improved, efficient therapies. Here, we show the potential of a lipid nanoparticle-mediated CRISPR approach using adenine base editors (ABEs) for ASLD treatment. To model ASLD, we first generated human -induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) from biopsies of individuals homozygous for the Finnish founder variant (c.1153C >T [p.Arg385Cys]) and edited this variant using the ABE. We then differentiated the hiPSCs into hepatocyte-like cells that showed a 1,000 -fold decrease in ASA levels compared to those of isogenic non -edited cells. Lastly, we tested three different FDA -approved lipid nanoparticle formulations to deliver the ABE-encoding RNA and the sgRNA targeting the ASL variant. This approach efficiently edited the ASL variant in fibroblasts with no apparent cell toxicity and minimal off -target effects. Further, the treatment resulted in a significant decrease in ASA, to levels of healthy donors, indicating restoration of the urea cycle. Our work describes a highly efficient approach to editing the disease -causing ASL variant and restoring the function of the urea cycle. This method relies on RNA delivered by lipid nanoparticles, which is compatible with clinical applications, improves its safety profile, and allows for scalable production.
Gene therapy has made significant progress in the treatment of hereditary hearing loss. However, most research has focused on deafness- related genes that are primarily expressed in hair cells with less attention given to multisite-expressed deafness genes. MPZL2, , the second leading cause of mild-to-moderate hereditary deafness, is widely expressed in different inner ear cells. We generated a mouse model with a deletion in the Mpzl2 gene, which displayed moderate and slowly progressive hearing loss, mimicking the phenotype of individuals with DFNB111. We developed a gene replacement therapy system mediated by AAV-ie for efficient transduction in various types of cochlear cells. AAV-ie-Mpzl2 Mpzl2 administration significantly lowered the auditory brainstem response and distortion product otoacoustic emission thresholds of Mpzl2-/-- /- mice for at least seven months. AAV-ie-Mpzl2 Mpzl2 delivery restored the structural integrity in both outer hair cells and Deiters cells. This study suggests the potential of gene therapy for MPZL2-related deafness and provides a proof of concept for gene therapy targeting other deafness-related genes that are expressed in different cell populations in the cochlea.
Allele-specific methylation (ASM) is an epigenetic modification whereby one parental allele becomes methylated and the other unmethylated at a specific locus. ASM is most often driven by the presence of nearby heterozygous variants that influence methylation, but also occurs somatically in the context of genomic imprinting. In this study, we investigate ASM using publicly available single-cell reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (scRRBS) data on 608 B cells sampled from six healthy B cell samples and 1,230 cells from 11 chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) samples. We developed a likelihood-based criterion to test whether a CpG exhibited ASM, based on the distributions of methylated and unmethylated reads both within and across cells. Applying our likelihood ratio test, 65,998 CpG sites exhibited ASM in healthy B cell samples according to a Bonferroni criterion (p < 8.4 x 10(-9)), and 32,862 CpG sites exhibited ASM in CLL samples (p < 8.5 x 10(-9)). We also called ASM at the sample level. To evaluate the accuracy of our method, we called heterozygous variants from the scRRBS data, which enabled variant-based calls of ASM within each cell. Comparing sample-level ASM calls to the variant-based measures of ASM, we observed a positive predictive value of 76%-100% across samples. We observed high concordance of ASM across samples and an overrepresentation of ASM in previously reported imprinted genes and genes with imprinting binding motifs. Our study demonstrates that single-cell bisulfite sequencing is a potentially powerful tool to investigate ASM, especially as studies expand to increase the number of samples and cells sequenced.
Glutamine synthetase (GS), encoded by GLUL, catalyzes the conversion of glutamate to glutamine. GS is pivotal for the generation of the neurotransmitters glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid and is the primary mechanism of ammonia detoxification in the brain. GS levels are regulated post-translationally by an N -terminal degron that enables the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of GS in a glutamineinduced manner. GS deficiency in humans is known to lead to neurological defects and death in infancy, yet how dysregulation of the degron-mediated control of GS levels might affect neurodevelopment is unknown. We ascertained nine individuals with severe developmental delay, seizures, and white matter abnormalities but normal plasma and cerebrospinal fluid biochemistry with de novo variants in GLUL. Seven out of nine were start -loss variants and two out of nine disrupted 50 UTR splicing resulting in splice exclusion of the initiation codon. Using transfection-based expression systems and mass spectrometry, these variants were shown to lead to translation initiation of GS from methionine 18, downstream of the N -terminal degron motif, resulting in a protein that is stable and enzymatically competent but insensitive to negative feedback by glutamine. Analysis of human single -cell transcriptomes demonstrated that GLUL is widely expressed in neuro- and glial-progenitor cells and mature astrocytes but not in post -mitotic neurons. One individual with a startloss GLUL variant demonstrated periventricular nodular heterotopia, a neuronal migration disorder, yet overexpression of stabilized GS in mice using in utero electroporation demonstrated no migratory deficits. These findings underline the importance of tight regulation of glutamine metabolism during neurodevelopment in humans.
Expanded CAG repeats in coding regions of different genes are the most common cause of dominantly inherited spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs). These repeats are unstable through the germline, and larger repeats lead to earlier onset. We measured somatic expansion in blood samples collected from 30 SCA1, 50 SCA2, 74 SCA3, and 30 SCA7 individuals over a mean interval of 8.5 years, along with postmortem tissues and fetal tissues from SCA1, SCA3, and SCA7 individuals to examine somatic expansion at different stages of life. We showed that somatic mosaicism in the blood increases over time. Expansion levels are significantly different among SCAs and correlate with CAG repeat lengths. The level of expansion is greater in individuals with SCA7 who manifest disease compared to that of those who do not yet display symptoms. Brain tissues from SCA individuals have larger expansions compared to the blood. The cerebellum has the lowest mosaicism among the studied brain regions, along with a high expression of ATXN s and DNA repair genes. This was the opposite in cortices, with the highest mosaicism and lower expression of ATXN s and DNA repair genes. Fetal cortices did not show repeat instability. This study shows that CAG repeats are increasingly unstable during life in the blood and the brain of SCA individuals, with gene- and tissue -specific patterns.
Utilizing trio whole-exome sequencing and a gene matching approach, we identified a cohort of 18 male individuals from 17 families with hemizygous variants in KCND1 , including two de novo missense variants, three maternally inherited protein -truncating variants, and 12 maternally inherited missense variants. Affected subjects present with a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by diverse neurological abnormalities, mostly delays in different developmental domains, but also distinct neuropsychiatric signs and epilepsy. Heterozygous carrier mothers are clinically unaffected. KCND1 encodes the a -subunit of Kv4.1 voltage -gated potassium channels. All variant -associated amino acid substitutions affect either the cytoplasmic N- or C -terminus of the channel protein except for two occurring in transmembrane segments 1 and 4. Kv4.1 channels were functionally characterized in the absence and presence of auxiliary b subunits. Variant -specific alterations of biophysical channel properties were diverse and varied in magnitude. Genetic data analysis in combination with our functional assessment shows that Kv4.1 channel dysfunction is involved in the pathogenesis of an X -linked neurodevelopmental disorder frequently associated with a variable neuropsychiatric clinical phenotype.
Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2 . MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex ( MOF and MSL3 ) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.
Bulk -tissue molecular quantitative trait loci (QTLs) have been the starting point for interpreting disease -associated variants, and contextspecific QTLs show particular relevance for disease. Here, we present the results of mapping interaction QTLs (iQTLs) for cell type, age, and other phenotypic variables in multi-omic, longitudinal data from the blood of individuals of diverse ancestries. By modeling the interaction between genotype and estimated cell -type proportions, we demonstrate that cell -type iQTLs could be considered as proxies for cell -type -specific QTL effects, particularly for the most abundant cell type in the tissue. The interpretation of age iQTLs, however, warrants caution because the moderation effect of age on the genotype and molecular phenotype association could be mediated by changes in cell -type composition. Finally, we show that cell -type iQTLs contribute to cell -type -specific enrichment of diseases that, in combination with additional functional data, could guide future functional studies. Overall, this study highlights the use of iQTLs to gain insights into the context specificity of regulatory effects.
Translational efforts in osteoarthritis are hampered by a gap in our understanding of disease processes at the molecular level. Here, we present evidence of pronounced transcriptional changes in high- and low-disease-grade cartilage tissue, pointing to embryonic processes involved in disease progression. We identify shared transcriptional programs between osteoarthritis cartilage and cell populations in the human embryonic and fetal limb, pointing to increases in pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes' transcriptional programs in low-grade cartilage and increases in osteoblastic signatures in high-grade disease tissue. We find that osteoarthritis genetic risk signals are enriched in six gene co-expression modules and show that these transcriptional signatures reflect cell-type-specific expression along the endochondral ossification developmental trajectory. Using this network approach in combination with causal inference analysis, we present evidence of a causal effect on osteoarthritis risk for variants associated with the expression of ten genes that have not been previously reported as effector genes in genome-wide association studies in osteoarthritis. Our findings point to key molecular pathways as drivers of cartilage degeneration and identify high-value drug targets and repurposing opportunities.
We present shaPRS, a method that leverages widespread pleiotropy between traits or shared genetic effects across ancestries, to improve the accuracy of polygenic scores. The method uses genome-wide summary statistics from two diseases or ancestries to improve the genetic effect estimate and standard error at SNPs where there is homogeneity of effect between the two datasets. When there is significant evidence of heterogeneity, the genetic effect from the disease or population closest to the target population is maintained. We show via simulation and a series of real -world examples that shaPRS substantially enhances the accuracy of polygenic risk scores (PRSs) for complex diseases and greatly improves PRS performance across ancestries. shaPRS is a PRS pre-processing method that is agnostic to the actual PRS generation method, and as a result, it can be integrated into existing PRS generation pipelines and continue to be applied as more performant PRS methods are developed over time.
Phenotype-driven gene prioritization is fundamental to diagnosing rare genetic disorders. While traditional approaches rely on curated knowledge graphs with phenotype-gene relations, recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) promise a streamlined text-to- gene solution. In this study, we evaluated five LLMs, including two generative pre-trained transformers (GPT) series and three Llama2 series, assessing their performance across task completeness, gene prediction accuracy, and adherence to required output structures. We conducted experiments, exploring various combinations of models, prompts, phenotypic input types, and task difficulty levels. Our findings revealed that the best-performed LLM, GPT-4, achieved an average accuracy of 17.0% in identifying diagnosed genes within the top 50 predictions, which still falls behind traditional tools. However, accuracy increased with the model size. Consistent results were observed over time, as shown in the dataset curated after 2023. Advanced techniques such as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and few-shot learning did not improve the accuracy. Sophisticated prompts were more likely to enhance task completeness, especially in smaller models. Conversely, complicated prompts tended to decrease output structure compliance rate. LLMs also achieved better-than-random prediction accuracy with free-text input, though performance was slightly lower than with standardized concept input. Bias analysis showed that highly cited genes, such as BRCA1, , TP53, , and PTEN, , are more likely to be predicted. Our study provides valuable insights into integrating LLMs with genomic analysis, contributing to the ongoing discussion on their utilization in clinical workflows.
Large prospective clinical trials are underway or planned that examine the clinical utility and cost effectiveness of genome-based newborn screening (gNBS). One gNBS platform, BeginNGS, currently screens 53,575 variants for 412 severe childhood genetic diseases with 1,603 efficacious therapies. Retrospective evaluation of BeginNGS in 618,290 subjects suggests adequate sensitivity and positive predictive value (PPV) to proceed to prospective studies. To inform pivotal clinical trial design, we undertook a pilot clinical trial. We enrolled 120 infants in a regional neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) who were not under consideration for rapid diagnostic genome sequencing (RDGS). Each enrollee received BeginNGS and two index tests (California state NBS and RDGS). California NBS identified 4 of 4 true positive (TP) findings (TP rate 3.6%, sensitivity 100%) and 11 false positive (FP) findings (PPV 27%). RDGS identified 41 diagnostic findings in 36 neonates (diagnostic rate 30%). BeginNGS identified 5 of 6 on-target TP disorders (TP rate 4.2%, 95% confidence interval 1%-8%, sensitivity 83%) and no FPs (PPV 100%). Changes in management were anticipated following the return of 27 RDGS results in 25 enrollees (clinical utility [CU] 21%), 3 of 4 NBS TPs (CU 2.7%), and all BeginNGS TPs (CU 4.2%). The incidence of actionable genetic diseases in NICU infants not being considered for RDGS suggests (1) performance of RDGS in-20% of admissions misses many genetic diagnoses, (2) NICU enrollment in gNBS trials will greatly increase power to test endpoints, and (3) NICUs may be attractive for early implementation of consented BeginNGS screening.
Genome-sequence-based newborn screening (gNBS) has substantial potential to improve outcomes in hundreds of severe childhood genetic disorders (SCGDs). However, a major impediment to gNBS is imprecision due to variants classified as pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) that are not SCGD causal. gNBS with 53,855 P/LP variants, 342 genes, 412 SCGDs, and 1,603 therapies was positive in 74% of UK Biobank (UKB470K) adults, suggesting 97% false positives. We used the phenomenon of purifying hyperselection, which acts to decrease the frequency of SCGD causal diplotypes, to reduce false positives. Training of gene-disease-inheritance mode-diplotype tetrads in 618,290 control and affected subjects identified 293 variants or haplotypes and seven genes with variable inheritance contributing higher positive diplotype counts than consistent with purifying hyperselection and with little or no evidence of SCGD causality. With these changes, 2.0% of UKB470K adults were positive. In contrast, gNBS was positive in 7.2% of 3,118 critically ill children with suspected SCGDs and 7.9% of 705 infant deaths. When compared with rapid diagnostic genome sequencing (RDGS), gNBS had 99.1% recall. In eight true-positive children, gNBS was projected to decrease time to diagnosis by a median of 121 days and avoid life-threatening disease presentations in four children, organ damage in six children, X$1.25 million in healthcare cost, and ten (1.4%) infant deaths. Federated training predicated on purifying hyperselection provides a general framework to attain high precision in population screening. Federated training across many biobanks and clinical trials can provide a privacy-preserving mechanism for qualification of gNBS in diverse genetic ancestries.
Large biobank samples provide an opportunity to integrate broad phenotyping, familial records, and molecular genetics data to study complex traits and diseases. We introduce Pearson-Aitken Family Genetic Risk Scores (PA-FGRS), a method for estimating disease liability from patterns of diagnoses in extended, age-censored genealogical records. We then apply the method to study a paradigmatic complex disorder, major depressive disorder (MDD), using the iPSYCH2015 case-cohort study of 30,949 MDD cases, 39,655 random population controls, and more than 2 million relatives. We show that combining PA-FGRS liabilities estimated from family records with molecular genotypes of probands improves three lines of inquiry. Incorporating PA-FGRS liabilities improves classification of MDD over and above polygenic scores, identifies robust genetic contributions to clinical heterogeneity in MDD associated with comorbidity, recurrence, and severity and can improve the power of genome-wide association studies. Our method is flexible and easy to use, and our study approaches are generalizable to other datasets and other complex traits and diseases.
By improving disease risk prediction, polygenic risk scores (PRSs) could have a significant impact on health promotion and disease prevention. Due to the historical oversampling of populations with European ancestry for genome-wide association studies, PRSs perform less well in other, understudied populations, leading to concerns that clinical use in their current forms could widen health care disparities. The PRIMED Consortium was established to develop methods to improve the performance of PRSs in global populations and individuals of diverse genetic ancestry. To this end, PRIMED is aggregating and harmonizing multiple phenotype and genotype datasets on AnVIL, an interoperable secure cloud-based platform, to perform individual- and summary-level analyses using population and statistical genetics approaches. Study sites, the coordinating center, and representatives from the NIH work alongside other NHGRI and global consortia to achieve these goals. PRIMED is also evaluating ethical and social implications of PRS implementation and investigating the joint modeling of social determinants of health and PRS in computing disease risk. The phenotypes of interest are primarily cardiometabolic diseases and cancer, the leading causes of death and disability worldwide. Early deliverables of the consortium include methods for data sharing on AnVIL, development of a common data model to harmonize phenotype and genotype data from cohort studies as well as electronic health records, adaptation of recent guidelines for population descriptors to global cohorts, and sharing of PRS methods/tools. As a multisite collaboration, PRIMED aims to foster equity in the development and use of polygenic risk assessment.
Four main medulloblastoma (MB) molecular subtypes have been identified based on transcriptional, DNA methylation, and genetic profiles. However, it is currently not known whether 3D genome architecture differs between MB subtypes. To address this question, we performed in situ Hi-C to reconstruct the 3D genome architecture of MB subtypes. In total, we generated Hi-C and matching transcriptome data for 28 surgical specimens and Hi-C data for one patient-derived xenograft. The average resolution of the Hi-C maps was 6,833 bp. Using these data, we found that insulation scores of topologically associating domains (TADs) were effective at distinguishing MB molecular subgroups. TAD insulation score differences between subtypes were globally not associated with differential gene expression, although we identified few exceptions near genes expressed in the lineages of origin of specific MB subtypes. Our study therefore supports the notion that TAD insulation scores can distinguish MB subtypes independently of their transcriptional differences.
Copy number variants (CNVs) are significant contributors to the pathogenicity of rare genetic diseases and, with new innovative methods, can now reliably be identified from exome sequencing. Challenges still remain in accurate classification of CNV pathogenicity. CNV calling using GATK-gCNV was performed on exomes from a cohort of 6,633 families (15,759 individuals) with heterogeneous phenotypes and variable prior genetic testing collected at the Broad Institute Center for Mendelian Genomics of the Genomics Research to Elucidate the Genetics of Rare Diseases consortium and analyzed using the seqr platform. The addition of CNV detection to exome analysis identified causal CNVs for 171 families (2.6%). The estimated sizes of CNVs ranged from 293 bp to 80 Mb. The causal CNVs consisted of 140 deletions, 15 duplications, 3 suspected complex structural variants (SVs), 3 insertions, and 10 complex SVs, the latter two groups being identified by orthogonal confirmation methods. To classify CNV variant pathogenicity, we used the 2020 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/ClinGen CNV interpretation standards and developed additional criteria to evaluate allelic and functional data as well as variants on the X chromosome to further advance the framework. We interpreted 151 CNVs as likely pathogenic/pathogenic and 20 CNVs as high-interest variants of uncertain significance. Calling CNVs from existing exome data increases the diagnostic yield for individuals undiagnosed after standard testing approaches, providing a higher-resolution alternative to arrays at a fraction of the cost of genome sequencing. Our improvements to the classification approach advances the systematic framework to assess the pathogenicity of CNVs.
The differential performance of polygenic risk scores (PRSs) by group is one of the major ethical barriers to their clinical use. It is also one of the main practical challenges for any implementation effort. The social repercussions of how people are grouped in PRS research must be considered in communications with research participants, including return of results. Here, we outline the decisions faced and choices made by a large multi-site clinical implementation study returning PRSs to diverse participants in handling this issue of differential performance. Our approach to managing the complexities associated with the differential performance of PRSs serves as a case study that can help future implementers of PRSs to plot an anticipatory course in response to this issue.
Cigarette smoking adversely affects many aspects of human health, and epigenetic responses to smoking may reflect mechanisms that mediate or defend against these effects. Prior studies of smoking and DNA methylation (DNAm), typically measured in leukocytes, have identified numerous smoking -associated regions (e.g., AHRR ). To identify smoking -associated DNAm features in typically inaccessible tissues, we generated array -based DNAm data for 916 tissue samples from the GTEx (Genotype -Tissue Expression) project representing 9 tissue types (lung, colon, ovary, prostate, blood, breast, testis, kidney, and muscle). We identified 6,350 smoking -associated CpGs in lung tissue (n = 212) and 2,735 in colon tissue (n = 210), most not reported previously. For all 7 other tissue types (sample sizes 38- 153), no clear associations were observed (false discovery rate 0.05), but some tissues showed enrichment for smoking -associated CpGs reported previously. For 1,646 loci (in lung) and 22 (in colon), smoking was associated with both DNAm and local gene expression. For loci detected in both lung and colon (e.g., AHRR , CYP1B1 , CYP1A1 ), top CpGs often differed between tissues, but similar clusters of hyper- or hypomethylated CpGs were observed, with hypomethylation at regulatory elements corresponding to increased expression. For lung tissue, 17 hallmark gene sets were enriched for smoking -associated CpGs, including xenobiotic- and cancer -related gene sets. At least four smoking -associated regions in lung were impacted by lung methylation quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that co -localize with genome-wide association study (GWAS) signals for lung function (FEV1/FVC), suggesting epigenetic alterations can mediate the effects of smoking on lung health. Our multi -tissue approach has identified smoking -associated regions in disease -relevant tissues, including effects that are shared across tissue types.
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has recently been used in translational research settings to facilitate diagnoses of Mendelian disorders. A significant obstacle for clinical laboratories in adopting RNA-seq is the low or absent expression of a significant number of disease-associated genes/transcripts in clinically accessible samples. As this is especially problematic in neurological diseases, we developed a clinical diagnostic approach that enhanced the detection and evaluation of tissue-specific genes/transcripts through fibroblast-to-neuron cell transdifferentiation. The approach is designed specifically to suit clinical implementation, emphasizing simplicity, cost effectiveness, turnaround time, and reproducibility. For clinical validation, we generated induced neurons (iNeurons) from 71 individuals with primary neurological phenotypes recruited to the Undiagnosed Diseases Network. The overall diagnostic yield was 25.4%. Over a quarter of the diagnostic findings benefited from transdifferentiation and could not be achieved by fibroblast RNA-seq alone. This iNeuron transcriptomic approach can be effectively integrated into diagnostic whole-transcriptome evaluation of individuals with genetic disorders.
The aim of fine mapping is to identify genetic variants causally contributing to complex traits or diseases. Existing fine -mapping methods employ Bayesian discrete mixture priors and depend on a pre -specified maximum number of causal variants, which may lead to suboptimal solutions. In this work, we propose a Bayesian fine -mapping method called h2 -D2, utilizing a continuous global -local shrinkage prior. We also present an approach to define credible sets of causal variants in continuous prior settings. Simulation studies demonstrate that h2 -D2 outperforms current state-of-the-art fine -mapping methods such as SuSiE and FINEMAP in accurately identifying causal variants and estimating their effect sizes. We further applied h2 -D2 to prostate cancer analysis and discovered some previously unknown causal variants. In addition, we inferred 369 target genes associated with the detected causal variants and several pathways that were significantly over -represented by these genes, shedding light on their potential roles in prostate cancer development and progression.
Replicability is the cornerstone of modern scientific research. Reliable identifications of genotype -phenotype associations that are significant in multiple genome-wide association studies (GWASs) provide stronger evidence for the findings. Current replicability analysis relies on the independence assumption among single -nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and ignores the linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure. We show that such a strategy may produce either overly liberal or overly conservative results in practice. We develop an efficient method, ReAD, to detect replicable SNPs associated with the phenotype from two GWASs accounting for the LD structure. The local dependence structure of SNPs across two heterogeneous studies is captured by a four -state hidden Markov model (HMM) built on two sequences of p values. By incorporating information from adjacent locations via the HMM, our approach provides more accurate SNP significance rankings. ReAD is scalable, platform independent, and more powerful than existing replicability analysis methods with effective false discovery rate control. Through analysis of datasets from two asthma GWASs and two ulcerative colitis GWASs, we show that ReAD can identify replicable genetic loci that existing methods might otherwise miss.
Genetic variants are involved in the orchestration of alternative polyadenylation (APA) events, while the role of DNA methylation in regulating APA remains unclear. We generated a comprehensive atlas of APA quantitative trait methylation sites (apaQTMs) across 21 different types of cancer (1,612 to 60,219 acting in cis and 4,448 to 142,349 in trans ). Potential causal apaQTMs in non -cancer samples were also identified. Mechanistically, we observed a strong enrichment of cis -apaQTMs near polyadenylation sites (PASs) and both cisand trans -apaQTMs in proximity to transcription factor (TF) binding regions. Through the integration of ChIP-signals and RNA-seq data from cell lines, we have identified several regulators of APA events, acting either directly or indirectly, implicating novel functions of some important genes, such as TCF7L2 , which is known for its involvement in type 2 diabetes and cancers. Furthermore, we have identified a vast number of QTMs that share the same putative causal CpG sites with five different cancer types, underscoring the roles of QTMs, including apaQTMs, in the process of tumorigenesis. DNA methylation is extensively involved in the regulation of APA events in human cancers. In an attempt to elucidate the potential underlying molecular mechanisms of APA by DNA methylation, our study paves the way for subsequent experimental validations into the intricate biological functions of DNA methylation in APA regulation and the pathogenesis of human cancers. To present a comprehensive catalog of apaQTM patterns, we introduce the Pancan-apaQTM database, available at https://pancan-apaqtm-zju.shinyapps.io/pancanaQTM/.
In Mendelian randomization, two single SNP-trait correlation-based methods have been developed to infer the causal direction between an exposure (e.g., a gene) and an outcome (e.g., a trait), called MR Steiger's method and its recent extension called Causal Direction-Ratio (CD-Ratio). Here we propose an approach based on R 2 , the coefficient of determination, to combine information from multiple (possibly correlated) SNPs to simultaneously infer the presence and direction of a causal relationship between an exposure and an outcome. Our proposed method generalizes Steiger's method from using a single SNP to multiple SNPs as IVs. It is especially useful in transcriptomewide association studies (TWASs) (and similar applications) with typically small sample sizes for gene expression (or another molecular trait) data, providing a more flexible and powerful approach to inferring causal directions. It can be applied to GWAS summary data with a reference panel. We also discuss the influence of invalid IVs and introduce a new approach called R2S to select and remove invalid IVs (if any) to enhance the robustness. We compared the performance of the proposed method with existing methods in simulations to demonstrate its advantages. We applied the methods to identify causal genes for high/low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL/LDL) using the individual-level GTEx gene expression data and UK Biobank GWAS data. The proposed method was able to confirm some well-known causal genes while identifying some novel ones. Additionally, we illustrated an application of the proposed method to GWAS summary to infer causal relationships between HDL/LDL and stroke/coronary artery disease (CAD).
Infertility, affecting similar to 10% of men, is predominantly caused by primary spermatogenic failure (SPGF). We screened likely pathogenic and pathogenic (LP/P) variants in 638 candidate genes for male infertility in 521 individuals presenting idiopathic SPGF and 323 normozoospermic men in the ESTAND cohort. Molecular diagnosis was reached for 64 men with SPGF (12%), with findings in 39 genes (6%). The yield did not differ significantly between the subgroups with azoospermia (20/185, 11%), oligozoospermia (18/181, 10%), and primary cryptorchidism with SPGF (26/155, 17%). Notably, 19 of 64 LP/P variants (30%) identified in 28 subjects represented recurrent findings in this study and/or with other male infertility cohorts. NR5A1 was the most frequently affected gene, with seven LP/P variants in six SPGF-affected men and two normozoospermic men. The link to SPGF was validated for recently proposed candidate genes ACTRT1, ASZ1, GLUD2, GREB1L, LEO1, RBM5, ROS1, and TGIF2LY. Heterozygous truncating variants in BNC1, reported in female infertility, emerged as plausible causes of severe oligozoospermia. Data suggested that several infertile men may present congenital conditions with less pronounced or pleiotropic phenotypes affecting the development and function of the reproductive system. Genes regulating the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis were affected in >30% of subjects with LP/P variants. Six individuals had more than one LP/P variant, including five with two findings from the gene panel. A 4-fold increased prevalence of cancer was observed in men with genetic infertility compared to the general male population (8% vs. 2%; p = 4.4 x 10(-3)). Expanding genetic testing in andrology will contribute to the multidisciplinary management of SPGF.
To identify modifier loci underlying variation in body mass index (BMI) in persons with cystic fibrosis (pwCF), we performed a genome- wide association study (GWAS). Utilizing longitudinal height and weight data, along with demographic information and covariates from 4,393 pwCF, we calculated AvgBMIz representing the average of per-quarter BMI Z scores. The GWAS incorporated 9.8M single nucle- otide polymorphisms (SNPs) with a minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.005 extracted from whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of each study subject. We observed genome-wide significant association with a variant in FTO (FaT mass and Obesity-associated gene; rs28567725; p value = 1.21e-08; MAF = 0.41, (3 = 0.106; n = 4,393 individuals) and a variant within ADAMTS5 (A Disintegrin And Met- alloproteinase with ThromboSpondin motifs 5; rs162500; p value = 2.11e-10; MAF = 0.005, (3 =- 0.768; n = 4,085 pancreatic-insuffi- cient individuals). Notably, BMI-associated variants in ADAMTS5 occur on a haplotype that is much more common in African (AFR, MAF = 0.183) than European (EUR, MAF = 0.006) populations (1000 Genomes project). A polygenic risk score (PRS) calculated using 924 SNPs (excluding 17 in FTO) showed significant association with AvgBMIz (p value = 2.2e-16; r(2) = 0.03). Association between var- iants in FTO and the PRS correlation reveals similarities in the genetic architecture of BMI in CF and the general population. Inclusion of Black individuals in whom the single-gene disorder CF is much less common but genomic diversity is greater facilitated detection of as- sociation with variants that are in LD with functional SNPs in ADAMTS5. Our results illustrate the importance of population diversity, particularly when attempting to identify variants that manifest only under certain physiologic conditions.
The tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) plays key roles in tumor progression and response to immunotherapy. Previous studies have identified individual germline variants associated with differences in TIME. Here, we hypothesize that common variants associated with breast cancer risk or cancer-related traits, represented by polygenic risk scores (PRSs), may jointly influence immune features in TIME. We derived 154 immune traits from bulk gene expression profiles of 764 breast tumors and 598 adjacent normal tissue samples from 825 individuals with breast cancer in the Nurses' Health Study (NHS) and NHSII. Immunohistochemical staining of four immune cell markers were available for a subset of 205 individuals. Germline PRSs were calculated for 16 different traits including breast cancer, autoimmune diseases, type 2 diabetes, ages at menarche and menopause, body mass index (BMI), BMI-adjusted waist-to-hip ratio, alcohol intake, and tobacco smoking. Overall, we identified 44 associations between germline PRSs and immune traits at false discovery rate q < 0.25, including 3 associations with q <0.05. We observed consistent inverse associations of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and Crohn disease (CD) PRSs with interferon signaling and STAT1 scores in breast tumor and adjacent normal tissue; these associations were replicated in a Norwegian cohort. Inverse associations were also consistently observed for IBD PRS and B cell abundance in normal tissue. We also observed positive associations between CD PRS and endothelial cell abundance in tumor. Our findings suggest that the genetic mechanisms that influence immune-related diseases are also associated with TIME in breast cancer.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified numerous lung cancer risk-associated loci. However, decoding molecular mechanisms of these associations is challenging since most of these genetic variants are non-protein-coding with unknown function. Here, we implemented massively parallel reporter assays (MPRAs) to simultaneously measure the allelic transcriptional activity of risk- associated variants. We tested 2,245 variants at 42 loci from 3 recent GWASs in East Asian and European populations in the context of two major lung cancer histological types and exposure to benzo(a)pyrene. a )pyrene. This MPRA approach identified one or more variants (median 11 variants) with significant effects on transcriptional activity at 88% of GWAS loci. Multimodal integration of lung-specific epigenomic data demonstrated that 63% of the loci harbored multiple potentially functional variants in linkage disequilibrium. While 22% of the significant variants showed allelic effects in both A549 (adenocarcinoma) and H520 (squamous cell carcinoma) cell lines, a subset of the functional variants displayed a significant cell-type interaction. Transcription factor analyses nominated potential regulators of the functional variants, including those with cell-type-specific expression and those predicted to bind multiple potentially functional variants across the GWAS loci. Linking functional variants to target genes based on four complementary approaches identified candidate susceptibility genes, including those affecting lung cancer cell growth. CRISPR interference of the top functional variant at 20q13.33 validated variant-to-gene connections, including RTEL1, , SOX18, , and ARFRP1. . Our data provide a comprehensive functional analysis of lung cancer GWAS loci and help elucidate the molecular basis of heterogeneity and polygenicity underlying lung cancer susceptibility.
Mendelian randomization (MR) provides valuable assessments of the causal effect of exposure on outcome, yet the application of conventional MR methods for mapping risk genes encounters new challenges. One of the issues is the limited availability of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) as instrumental variables (IVs), hampering the estimation of sparse causal effects. Additionally, the often context- or tissue-specific eQTL effects challenge the MR assumption of consistent IV effects across eQTL and GWAS data. To address these challenges, we propose a multi-context multivariable integrative MR framework, mintMR, for mapping expression and molecular traits as joint exposures. It models the effects of molecular exposures across multiple tissues in each gene region, while simultaneously estimating across multiple gene regions. It uses eQTLs with consistent effects across more than one tissue type as IVs, improving IV consistency. A major innovation of mintMR involves employing multi-view learning methods to collectively model latent indicators of disease relevance across multiple tissues, molecular traits, and gene regions. The multi-view learning captures the major patterns of disease relevance and uses these patterns to update the estimated tissue relevance probabilities. The proposed mintMR iterates between performing a multi-tissue MR for each gene region and joint learning the disease-relevant tissue probabilities across gene regions, improving the estimation of sparse effects across genes. We apply mintMR to evaluate the causal effects of gene expression and DNA methylation for 35 complex traits using multi-tissue QTLs as IVs. The proposed mintMR controls genome-wide inflation and offers insights into disease mechanisms.
Local genetic correlation analysis is an important tool for identifying genetic loci with shared biology across traits. Recently, Border et al. have shown that the results of these analyses are confounded by cross-trait assortative mating (xAM), leading to many false-positive findings. Here, we describe LAVA-Knock, a local genetic correlation method that builds off an existing genetic correlation method, LAVA, and augments it by generating synthetic data in a way that preserves local and long-range linkage disequilibrium (LD), allowing us to reduce the confounding induced by xAM. We show in simulations based on a realistic xAM model and in genome-wide association study (GWAS) applications for 630 trait pairs that LAVA-Knock can greatly reduce the bias due to xAM relative to LAVA. Furthermore, we show a significant positive correlation between the reduction in local genetic correlations and estimates in the literature of cross- mate phenotype correlations; in particular, pairs of traits that are known to have high cross-mate phenotype correlation values have a significantly higher reduction in the number of local genetic correlations compared with other trait pairs. A few representative examples include education and intelligence, education and alcohol consumption, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and depression. These results suggest that LAVA-Knock can reduce confounding due to both short-range LD and long-range LD induced by xAM.
Secondary findings (SFs) from genomic sequencing can have significant impacts on patient health, yet existing practices guiding their clinical investigation are inconsistent. We systematically reviewed existing SFs policies to identify variations and gaps in guidance. We cataloged and appraised international policies from academic databases (n = 5, inception-02/2022) and international human genetic societies (n = 64; inception-05/2022), across the continuum of SFs selection, analysis, and clinical management. We assessed quality using AGREE-II and interpreted results using qualitative description. Of the 63 SFs policies identified, most pertained to clinical management of SFs (98%; n = 62; primarily consent and disclosure), some guided SFs analysis (60%; n = 38), while fewer mentioned SFs selection (48%; n = 30). Overall, policies recommend (1) identifying clinically actionable, pathogenic variants with high positive predictive values for disease (selection), (2) bioinformatically filtering variants using evidence-informed gene lists (analysis), and (3) discussing with affected individuals the SFs identified, their penetrance, expressivity, medical implications, and management (clinical management). Best practices for SFs variant analysis, clinical validation, and follow-up (i.e., surveillance, treatment, etc.) were minimally described. Upon quality assessment, policies were highly rated for scope and clarity (median score, 69) but were limited by their rigor and applicability (median scores, 27 and 25). Our review represents a comprehensive international synthesis of policy guiding SFs across the continuum of selection, analysis, and clinical management. Our synthesis will help providers navigate critical decision points in SFs investigation, although significant work is needed to address gaps in SFs analysis, clinical validation, and follow-up processes and to support evidence-based practice.
Genome analysis of individuals affected by retinitis pigmentosa (RP) identified two rare nucleotide substitutions at the same genomic location on chromosome 11 (g.61392563 [GRCh38]), 69 base pairs upstream of the start codon of the ciliopathy gene TMEM216 (c.-69G>A,- 69G>A, c.-69G>T- 69G>T [GenBank: NM_001173991.3]), in individuals of South Asian and African ancestry, respectively. Genotypes included 71 homozygotes and 3 mixed heterozygotes in trans with a predicted loss-of-function allele. Haplotype analysis showed single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) common across families, suggesting ancestral alleles within the two distinct ethnic populations. Clinical phenotype analysis of 62 available individuals from 49 families indicated a similar clinical presentation with night blindness in the first decade and progressive peripheral field loss thereafter. No evident systemic ciliopathy features were noted. Functional characterization of these variants by luciferase reporter gene assay showed reduced promotor activity. Nanopore sequencing confirmed the lower transcription of the TMEM216 c.-69G>T- 69G>T allele in blood-derived RNA from a heterozygous carrier, and reduced expression was further recapitulated by qPCR, using both leukocytes-derived RNA of c.-69G>T- 69G>T homozygotes and total RNA from genome-edited hTERT-RPE1 cells carrying homozygous TMEM216 c.-69G>A.- 69G>A. In conclusion, these variants explain a significant proportion of unsolved cases, specifically in individuals of African ancestry, suggesting that reduced TMEM216 expression might lead to abnormal ciliogenesis and photoreceptor degeneration.
Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital heart lesion with an estimated population prevalence of 1%. We hypothesize that specific gene variants predispose to early-onset complications of BAV (EBAV). We analyzed whole-exome sequences (WESs) to identify rare coding variants that contribute to BAV disease in 215 EBAV-affected families. Predicted damaging variants in candidate genes with moderate or strong supportive evidence to cause developmental cardiac phenotypes were present in 107 EBAV-affected families (50% of total), including genes that cause BAV (9%) or heritable thoracic aortic disease (HTAD, 19%). After appropriate filtration, we also identified 129 variants in 54 candidate genes that are associated with autosomal-dominant congenital heart phenotypes, including recurrent deleterious variation of FBN2, MYH6, channelopathy genes, and type 1 and 5 collagen genes. These findings confirm our hypothesis that unique rare genetic variants drive early-onset presentations of BAV disease.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the second most common cause of early-onset dementia after Alzheimer disease (AD). Efforts in the field mainly focus on familial forms of disease (fFTDs), while studies of the genetic etiology of sporadic FTD (sFTD) have been less common. In the current work, we analyzed 4,685 sFTD cases and 15,308 controls looking for common genetic determinants for sFTD. We found a cluster of variants at the MAPT (rs199443; p = 2.5 3 10(-12), OR = 1.27) and APOE (rs6857; p = 1.31 3 10(-12), OR = 1.27) loci and a candidate locus on chromosome 3 (rs1009966; p = 2.41 3 10(-8), OR = 1.16) in the intergenic region between RPSA and MOBP, contributing to increased risk for sFTD through effects on expression and/or splicing in brain cortex of functionally relevant in-cis genes at the MAPT and RPSA-MOBP loci. The association with the MAPT (H1c clade) and RPSA-MOBP loci may suggest common genetic pleiotropy across FTD and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) (MAPT and RPSA-MOBP loci) and across FTD, AD, Parkinson disease (PD), and cortico-basal degeneration (CBD) (MAPT locus). Our data also suggest population specificity of the risk signals, with MAPT and APOE loci associations mainly driven by Central/Nordic and Mediterranean Europeans, respectively. This study lays the foundations for future work aimed at further characterizing population-specific features of potential FTD-discriminant APOE haplotype(s) and the functional involvement and contribution of the MAPT H1c haplotype and RPSA-MOBP loci to pathogenesis of sporadic forms of FTD in brain cortex.
We previously identified a homozygous Alu insertion variant (Alu_Ins) in the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of SPINK1 as the cause of severe infantile isolated exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Although we established that Alu_Ins leads to the complete loss of SPINK1 mRNA expression, the precise mechanisms remained elusive. Here, we aimed to elucidate these mechanisms through a hypothesis- driven approach. Initially, we speculated that, owing to its particular location, Alu_Ins could independently disrupt mRNA 3' end formation and/or affect other post-transcriptional processes such as nuclear export and translation. However, employing a 3'-UTR luciferase reporter assay, Alu_Ins was found to result in only an- 50% reduction in luciferase activity compared to wild type, which is insufficient to account for the severe pancreatic deficiency in the Alu_Ins homozygote. We then postulated that double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) structures formed between Alu elements, an upstream mechanism regulating gene expression, might be responsible. Using RepeatMasker, we identified two Alu elements within SPINK1's third intron, both oriented oppositely to Alu_ Ins. Through RNAfold predictions and fulllength gene expression assays, we investigated orientation-dependent interactions between these Alu repeats. We provide compelling evidence to link the detrimental effect of Alu_Ins to extensive dsRNA structures formed between Alu_Ins and pre-existing intronic Alu sequences, including the restoration of SPINK1 mRNA expression by aligning all three Alu elements in the same orientation. Given the widespread presence of Alu elements in the human genome and the potential for new Alu insertions at almost any locus, our findings have important implications for detecting and interpreting Alu insertions in disease genes.
Joint association analysis of multiple traits with multiple genetic variants can provide insight into genetic architecture and pleiotropy, improve trait prediction, and increase power for detecting association. Furthermore, some traits are naturally high-dimensional, e.g., images, networks, or longitudinally measured traits. Assessing significance for multitrait genetic association can be challenging, especially when the sample has population sub-structure and/or related individuals. Failure to adequately adjust for sample structure can lead to power loss and inflated type 1 error, and commonly used methods for assessing significance can work poorly with a large number of traits or be computationally slow. We developed JASPER, a fast, powerful, robust method for assessing significance of multitrait association with a set of genetic variants, in samples that have population sub-structure, admixture, and/or relatedness. In simulations, JASPER has higher power, better type 1 error control, and faster computation than existing methods, with the power and speed advantage of JASPER increasing with the number of traits. JASPER is potentially applicable to a wide range of association testing applications, including for multiple disease traits, expression traits, image-derived traits, and microbiome abundances. It allows for covariates, ascertainment, and rare variants and is robust to phenotype model misspecification. We apply JASPER to analyze gene expression in the Framingham Heart Study, where, compared to alternative approaches, JASPER finds more significant associations, including several that indicate pleiotropic effects, most of which replicate previous results, while others have not previously been reported. Our results demonstrate the promise of JASPER for powerful multitrait analysis in structured samples.
Increasing evidence is emerging to link age-associated complex musculoskeletal diseases, including osteoarthritis (OA), to developmental factors. Multiple studies have shown a functional role for DNA methylation in the genetic mechanisms of OA risk using articular cartilage samples taken from aged individuals, yet knowledge of temporal changes to the methylome during human cartilage development is limited. We quantified DNA methylation at 700,000 individual CpGs across the epigenome of developing human chondrocytes in 72 samples ranging from 7 to 21 post-conception weeks. We identified significant changes in 3% of all CpGs and >8,200 developmental differentially methylated regions. We further identified 24 loci at which OA genetic variants colocalize with methylation quantitative trait loci. Through integrating developmental and mature human chondrocyte datasets, we find evidence for functional effects exerted solely in development or throughout the life course. This will have profound impacts on future approaches to translating genetic pathways for therapeutic intervention.
Leukocyte telomere length (LTL) varies significantly across human populations, with individuals of African ancestry having longer LTL than non -Africans. However, the genetic and environmental drivers of LTL variation in Africans remain largely unknown. We report here on the relationship between LTL, genetics, and a variety of environmental and climatic factors in ethnically diverse African adults ( n = 1,818) originating from Botswana, Tanzania, Ethiopia, and Cameroon. We observe significant variation in LTL among populations, finding that the San hunter -gatherers from Botswana have the longest leukocyte telomeres and that the Fulani pastoralists from Cameroon have the shortest telomeres. Genetic factors explain -50% of LTL variation among individuals. Moreover, we observe a significant negative association between Plasmodium falciparum malaria endemicity and LTL while adjusting for age, sex, and genetics. Within Africa, adults from populations indigenous to areas with high malaria exposure have shorter LTL than those in populations indigenous to areas with low malaria exposure. Finally, we explore to what degree the genetic architecture underlying LTL in Africa covaries with malaria exposure.
Some commercial firms currently sell polygenic indexes (PGIs) to individual consumers, despite their relatively low predictive power. It might be tempting to assume that because the predictive power of many PGIs is so modest, other sorts of firms-such as those selling insurance and financial services-will not be interested in using PGIs for their own purposes. We argue to the contrary. We build this argument in two ways. First, we offer a very simple model, rooted in economic theory, of a profit-maximizing firm that can gain information about a single consumer's genome. We use the model to show that, depending on the specific economic environment, a firm would be willing to pay for statistically noisy PGIs, even if they allow for only a small reduction in uncertainty. Second, we describe two plausible scenarios in which these different kinds of firms could conceivably use PGIs to maximize profits. Finally, we briefly discuss some of the associated ethics and policy issues. They deserve more attention, which is unlikely to be given until it is first recognized that firms whose services affect a large swath of the public will indeed have incentives to use PGIs.
Methods of estimating polygenic scores (PGSs) from genome-wide association studies are increasingly utilized. However, independent method evaluation is lacking, and method comparisons are often limited. Here, we evaluate polygenic scores derived via seven methods in five biobank studies (totaling about 1.2 million participants) across 16 diseases and quantitative traits, building on a reference-standardized framework. We conducted meta-analyses to quantify the effects of method choice, hyperparameter tuning, method ensembling, and the target biobank on PGS performance. We found that no single method consistently outperformed all others. PGS effect sizes were more variable between biobanks than between methods within biobanks when methods were well tuned. Differences between methods were largest for the two investigated autoimmune diseases, seropositive rheumatoid arthritis and type 1 diabetes. For most methods, cross-validation was more reliable for tuning hyperparameters than automatic tuning (without the use of target data). For a given target phenotype, elastic net models combining PGS across methods (ensemble PGS) tuned in the UK Biobank provided consistent, high, and cross-biobank transferable performance, increasing PGS effect sizes ( b coefficients) by a median of 5.0% relative to LDpred2 and MegaPRS (the two best-performing single methods when tuned with cross-validation). Our interactively browsable online-results and open-source workflow prspipe provide a rich resource and reference for the analysis of polygenic scoring methods across biobanks.
The precise regulation of DNA replication is vital for cellular division and genomic integrity. Central to this process is the replication factor C (RFC) complex, encompassing five subunits, which loads proliferating cell nuclear antigen onto DNA to facilitate the recruitment of replication and repair proteins and enhance DNA polymerase processivity. While RFC1's role in cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy, and vestibular areflexia syndrome (CANVAS) is known, the contributions of RFC2-5 subunits on human Mendelian disorders is largely unexplored. Our research links bi-allelic variants in RFC4, , encoding a core RFC complex subunit, to an undiagnosed disorder characterized by incoordination and muscle weakness, hearing impairment, and decreased body weight. We discovered across nine affected individuals rare, conserved, predicted pathogenic variants in RFC4, , all likely to disrupt the C-terminal domain indispensable for RFC complex formation. Analysis of a previously determined cryo-EM structure of RFC bound to proliferating cell nuclear antigen suggested that the variants disrupt interactions within RFC4 and/or destabilize the RFC complex. Cellular studies using RFC4-deficient HeLa cells and primary fibroblasts demonstrated decreased RFC4 protein, compromised stability of the other RFC complex subunits, and perturbed RFC complex formation. Additionally, functional studies of the RFC4 variants affirmed diminished RFC complex formation, and cell cycle studies suggested perturbation of DNA replication and cell cycle progression. Our integrated approach of combining in silico, , structural, cellular, and functional analyses establishes compelling evidence that bi-allelic loss-of-function RFC4 variants contribute to the pathogenesis of this multi- systemic disorder. These insights broaden our understanding of the RFC complex and its role in human health and disease.
Delineation of structural variants (SVs) at sequence resolution in highly repetitive genomic regions has long been intractable. The sequence properties, origins, and functional effects of classes of genomic rearrangements such as ring chromosomes and Robertsonian translocations thus remain unknown. To resolve these complex structures, we leveraged several recent milestones in the field, including (1) the emergence of long-read sequencing, (2) the gapless telomere-to-telomere (T2T) assembly, and (3) a tool (BigClipper) to discover chromosomal rearrangements from long reads. We applied these technologies across 13 cases with ring chromosomes, Robertsonian translocations, and complex SVs that were unresolved by short reads, followed by validation using optical genome mapping (OGM). Our analyses resolved 10 of 13 cases, including a Robertsonian translocation and all ring chromosomes. Multiple breakpoints were localized to genomic regions previously recalcitrant to sequencing such as acrocentric p-arms, ribosomal DNA arrays, and telomeric repeats, and involved complex structures such as a deletion-inversion and interchromosomal dispersed duplications. We further performed methylation profiling from long-read data to discover phased differential methylation in a gene promoter proximal to a ring fusion, suggesting a long-range position effect (LRPE) with heterochromatin spreading. Breakpoint sequences suggested mechanisms of SV formation such as microhomology-mediated and non-homologous end-joining, as well as non-allelic homologous recombination. These methods provide some of the first glimpses into the sequence resolution of Robertsonian translocations and illuminate the structural diversity of ring chromosomes and complex chromosomal rearrangements with implications for genome biology, prediction of LRPEs from integrated multi-omics technologies, and molecular diagnostics in rare disease cases.
Selenophosphate synthetase (SEPHS) plays an essential role in selenium metabolism. Two mammalian SEPHS paralogues, SEPHS1 and SEPHS2, share high sequence identity and structural homology with SEPHS. Here, we report nine individuals from eight families with developmental delay, growth and feeding problems, hypotonia, and dysmorphic features, all with heterozygous missense variants in SEPHS1. Eight of these individuals had a recurrent variant at amino acid position 371 of SEPHS1 (p.Arg371Trp, p.Arg371Gln, and p.Arg371Gly); seven of these variants were known to be de novo . Structural modeling and biochemical assays were used to understand the effect of these variants on SEPHS1 function. We found that a variant at residue Trp352 results in local structural changes of the C -terminal region of SEPHS1 that decrease the overall thermal stability of the enzyme. In contrast, variants of a solvent -exposed residue Arg371 do not impact enzyme stability and folding but could modulate direct protein -protein interactions of SEPSH1 with cellular factors in promoting cell proliferation and development. In neuronal SH-SY5Y cells, we assessed the impact of SEPHS1 variants on cell proliferation and ROS production and investigated the mRNA expression levels of genes encoding stress -related selenoproteins. Our findings provided evidence that the identified SEPHS1 variants enhance cell proliferation by modulating ROS homeostasis. Our study supports the hypothesis that SEPHS1 plays a critical role during human development and provides a basis for further investigation into the molecular mechanisms employed by SEPHS1. Furthermore, our data suggest that variants in SEPHS1 are associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder.
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is an endocrine syndrome that affects a large portion of women worldwide. This proteogenomic and functional study aimed to uncover candidate therapeutic targets for PCOS. We comprehensively investigated the causal association between circulating proteins and PCOS using two-sample Mendelian randomization analysis. Cis- protein quantitative trait loci were derived from six genome-wide association studies (GWASs) on plasma proteome. Genetic associations with PCOS were obtained from a large-scale GWAS meta-analysis, FinnGen cohort, and UK Biobank. Colocalization analyses were performed to prioritize the causal role of candidate proteins. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) and druggability evaluation assessed the druggability of candidate proteins. We evaluated the enrichment of tier 1 and 2 candidate proteins in individuals with PCOS and a mouse model and explored the potential application of the identified drug target. Genetically predicted levels of 65 proteins exhibited associations with PCOS risk, with 30 proteins showing elevated levels and 35 proteins showing decreased levels linked to higher susceptibility. PPI analyses revealed that FSHB, POSTN, CCN2, and CXCL11 interacted with targets of current PCOS medications. Eighty medications targeting 20 proteins showed their potential for repurposing as therapeutic targets for PCOS. EGLN1 levels were elevated in granulosa cells and the plasma of individuals with PCOS and in the plasma and ovaries of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)-induced PCOS mouse model. As an EGLN1 inhibitor, administration of roxadustat in the PCOS mouse model elucidated the EGLN1-HIF1a-ferroptosis axis in inducing PCOS and validated its therapeutic effect in PCOS. Our study identifies candidate proteins causally associated with PCOS risk and suggests that targeting EGLN1 provides a promising treatment strategy.
Understanding the impact of splicing and nonsense variants on RNA is crucial for the resolution of variant classification as well as their suitability for precision medicine interventions. This is primarily enabled through RNA studies involving transcriptomics followed by targeted assays using RNA isolated from clinically accessible tissues (CATs) such as blood or skin of affected individuals. Insufficient disease gene expression in CATs does however pose a major barrier to RNA based investigations, which we show is relevant to 1,436 Mendelian disease genes. We term these "silent"Mendelian genes (SMGs), the largest portion (36%) of which are associated with neurological disorders. We developed two approaches to induce SMG expression in human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) to overcome this limitation, including CRISPR-activation-based gene transactivation and fibroblast-to-neuron transdifferentiation. Initial transactivation screens involving 40 SMGs stimulated our development of a highly multiplexed transactivation system culminating in the 6- to 90,000-fold induction of expression of 20/20 (100%) SMGs tested in HDFs. Transdifferentiation of HDFs directly to neurons led to expression of 193/516 (37.4%) of SMGs implicated in neurological disease. The magnitude and isoform diversity of SMG expression following either transactivation or transdifferentiation was comparable to clinically relevant tissues. We apply transdifferentiation and/or gene transactivation combined with short- and long-read RNA sequencing to investigate the impact that variants in USH2A, , SCN1A, , DMD, , and PAK3 have on RNA using HDFs derived from affected individuals. Transactivation and transdifferentiation represent rapid, scalable functional genomic solutions to investigate variants impacting SMGs in the patient cell and genomic context.
Implementation of genomic medicine into healthcare requires a workforce educated through effective educational approaches. However, ascertaining the impact of genomics education activities or resources is limited by a lack of evaluation and inconsistent descriptions in the literature. We aim to support those developing genomics education to consider how best to capture evaluation data that demonstrate program outcomes and effectiveness within scope. Here, we present an evaluation framework that is adaptable to multiple settings for use by genomics educators with or without education or evaluation backgrounds. The framework was developed as part of a broader program supporting genomic research translation coordinated by the Australian Genomics consortium. We detail our mixed-methods approach involving an expert workshop, literature review and iterative expert input to reach consensus and synthesis of a new evaluation framework for genomics education. The resulting theory-informed and evidence-based framework encompasses evaluation across all stages of education program development, implementation and reporting, and acknowledges the critical role of stakeholders and the effects of external influences.
A health workforce capable of implementing genomic medicine requires effective genomics education. Genomics education interventions developed for health professions over the last two decades, and their impact, are variably described in the literature. To inform an evaluation framework for genomics education, we undertook an exploratory scoping review of published needs assessments for, and/or evaluations of, genomics education interventions for health professionals from 2000 to 2023. We retrieved and screened 4,659 records across the two searches with 363 being selected for full-text review and consideration by an interdisciplinary working group. 104 articles were selected for inclusion in the review-60 needs assessments, 52 genomics education evaluations, and eight describing both. Included articles spanned all years and described education interventions in over 30 countries. Target audiences included medical specialists, nurses/midwives, and/or allied health professionals. Evaluation questions, outcomes, and measures were extracted, categorized, and tabulated to iteratively compare measures across stages of genomics education evaluation: planning (pre-implementation), development and delivery (implementation), and impact (immediate, intermediate, or long-term outcomes). They are presented here along with descriptions of study designs. We document the wide variability in evaluation approaches and terminology used to define measures and note that few articles considered downstream (long-term) outcomes of genomics education interventions. Alongside the evaluation framework for genomics education, results from this scoping review form part of a toolkit to help educators to undertake rigorous genomics evaluation that is fit for purpose and can contribute to the growing evidence base of the contribution of genomics education in implementation strategies for genomic medicine.
Detection of structural variants (SVs) is currently biased toward those that alter copy number. The relative contribution of inversions toward genetic disease is unclear. In this study, we analyzed genome sequencing data for 33,924 families with rare disease from the 100,000 Genomes Project. From a database hosting >500 million SVs, we focused on 351 genes where haploinsufficiency is a confirmed disease mechanism and identified 47 ultra-rare rearrangements that included an inversion (24 bp to 36.4 Mb, 20/47 de novo). Validation utilized a number of orthogonal approaches, including retrospective exome analysis. RNA-seq data supported the respective diagnoses for six participants. Phenotypic blending was apparent in four probands. Diagnostic odysseys were a common theme (>50 years for one individual), and targeted analysis for the specific gene had already been performed for 30% of these individuals but with no findings. We provide formal confirmation of a European founder origin for an intragenic MSH2 inversion. For two individuals with complex SVs involving the MECP2 mutational hotspot, ambiguous SV structures were resolved using long-read sequencing, influencing clinical interpretation. A de novo inversion of HOXD11-13 was uncovered in a family with Kantaputra-type mesomelic dysplasia. Lastly, a complex translocation disrupting APC and involving nine rearranged segments confirmed a clinical diagnosis for three family members and resolved a conundrum for a sibling with a single polyp. Overall, inversions play a small but notable role in rare disease, likely explaining the etiology in around 1/750 families across heterogeneous clinical cohorts.
FRY -like transcription coactivator (FRYL) belongs to a Furry protein family that is evolutionarily conserved from yeast to humans. The functions of FRYL in mammals are largely unknown, and variants in FRYL have not previously been associated with a Mendelian disease. Here, we report fourteen individuals with heterozygous variants in FRYL who present with developmental delay, intellectual disability, dysmorphic features, and other congenital anomalies in multiple systems. The variants are confirmed de novo in all individuals except one. Human genetic data suggest that FRYL is intolerant to loss of function (LoF). We find that the fly FRYL ortholog, furry ( fry ), is expressed in multiple tissues, including the central nervous system where it is present in neurons but not in glia. Homozygous fry LoF mutation is lethal at various developmental stages, and loss of fry in mutant clones causes defects in wings and compound eyes. We next modeled four out of the five missense variants found in affected individuals using fry knockin alleles. One variant behaves as a severe LoF variant, whereas two others behave as partial LoF variants. One variant does not cause any observable defect in flies, and the corresponding human variant is not confirmed to be de novo , suggesting that this is a variant of uncertain significance. In summary, our findings support that fry is required for proper development in flies and that the LoF variants in FRYL cause a dominant disorder with developmental and neurological symptoms due to haploinsufficiency.
The ENIGMA research consortium develops and applies methods to determine clinical significance of variants in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer genes. An ENIGMA BRCA1/2 classification sub-group, formed in 2015 as a ClinGen external expert panel, evolved into a ClinGen internal Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) to align with Food and Drug Administration recognized processes for ClinVar contributions. The VCEP reviewed American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association of Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) classification criteria for relevance to interpreting BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants. Statistical methods were used to calibrate evidence strength for different data types. Pilot specifications were tested on 40 variants and documentation revised for clarity and ease of use. The original criterion descriptions for 13 evidence codes were considered non-applicable or overlapping with other criteria. Scenario of use was extended or re-purposed for eight codes. Extensive analysis and/or data review informed specification descriptions and weights for all codes. Specifications were applied to pilot variants with pre-existing ClinVar classification as follows: 13 uncertain significance or conflicting, 14 pathogenic and/or likely pathogenic, and 13 benign and/or likely benign. Review resolved classification for 11/13 uncertain significance or conflicting variants and retained or improved confidence in classification for the remaining variants. Alignment of pre-existing ENIGMA research classification processes with ACMG/AMP classification guidelines highlighted several gaps in the research processes and the baseline ACMG/AMP criteria. Calibration of evidence strength was key to justify utility and strength of different data types for gene-specific application. The gene-specific criteria demonstrated value for improving ACMG/AMP-aligned classification of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants.
PPFIA3 encodes the protein -tyrosine phosphatase, receptor -type, F-polypeptide-interacting-protein-alpha-3 (PPFIA3), which is a member of the LAR-protein-tyrosine phosphatase-interacting-protein (liprin) family involved in synapse formation and function, synaptic vesicle transport, and presynaptic active zone assembly. The protein structure and function are evolutionarily well conserved, but human diseases related to PPFIA3 dysfunction are not yet reported in OMIM. Here, we report 20 individuals with rare PPFIA3 variants (19 heterozygous and 1 compound heterozygous) presenting with developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, dysmorphisms, microcephaly or macrocephaly, autistic features, and epilepsy with reduced penetrance. Seventeen unique PPFIA3 variants were detected in 18 families. To determine the pathogenicity of PPFIA3 variants in vivo, we generated transgenic fruit flies producing either human wild -type (WT) PPFIA3 or five missense variants using GAL4-UAS targeted gene expression systems. In the fly overexpression assays, we found that the PPFIA3 variants in the region encoding the N -terminal coiled -coil domain exhibited stronger phenotypes compared to those affecting the C -terminal region. In the loss -of -function fly assay, we show that the homozygous loss of fly Liprin-a leads to embryonic lethality. This lethality is partially rescued by the expression of human PPFIA3 WT, suggesting human PPFIA3 function is partially conserved in the fly. However, two of the tested variants failed to rescue the lethality at the larval stage and one variant failed to rescue lethality at the adult stage. Altogether, the human and fruit fly data reveal that the rare PPFIA3 variants are dominantnegative loss -of -function alleles that perturb multiple developmental processes and synapse formation.
Understanding the contribution of gene-environment interactions (GxE) to complex trait variation can provide insights into disease mechanisms, explain sources of heritability, and improve genetic risk prediction. While large biobanks with genetic and deep phenotypic data hold promise for obtaining novel insights into GxE, our understanding of GxE architecture in complex traits remains limited. We introduce a method to estimate the proportion of trait variance explained by GxE (GxE heritability) and additive genetic effects (additive heritability) across the genome and within specific genomic annotations. We show that our method is accurate in simulations and computationally efficient for biobank-scale datasets. We applied our method to common array SNPs (MAF >= 1 %), fifty quantitative traits, and four environmental variables (smoking, sex, age, and statin usage) in unrelated white British individuals in the UK Biobank. We found 68 trait-E pairs with significant genome-wide GxE heritability ( p < 0.05=200 ) with a ratio of GxE to additive heritability of = 6. 8 % on average. Analyzing = 8 million imputed SNPs (MAF >= 0. 1 %), we documented an approximate 28 % increase in genome-wide GxE heritability compared to array SNPs. We partitioned GxE heritability across minor allele frequency (MAF) and local linkage disequilibrium (LD) values, revealing that, like additive allelic effects, GxE allelic effects tend to increase with decreasing MAF and LD. Analyzing GxE heritability near genes highly expressed in specific tissues, we find significant brain-specific enrichment for body mass index (BMI) and basal metabolic rate in the context of smoking and adipose-specific enrichment for waist-hip ratio (WHR) in the context of sex.
The secreted mucins MUC5AC and MUC5B are large glycoproteins that play critical defensive roles in pathogen entrapment and mucociliary clearance. Their respective genes contain polymorphic and degenerate protein-coding variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs) that make the loci difficult to investigate with short reads. We characterize the structural diversity of MUC5AC and MUC5B by long-read sequencing and assembly of 206 human and 20 nonhuman primate (NHP) haplotypes. We find that human MUC5B is largely invariant (5,761-5,762 amino acids [aa]); however, seven haplotypes have expanded VNTRs (6,291-7,019 aa). In contrast, 30 allelic variants of MUC5AC encode 16 distinct proteins (5,249-6,325 aa) with cysteine-rich domain and VNTR copy-number variation. We group MUC5AC alleles into three phylogenetic clades: H1 (46%, similar to 5,654 aa), H2 (33%, similar to 5,742 aa), and H3 (7%, similar to 6,325 aa). The two most common human MUC5AC variants are smaller than NHP gene models, suggesting a reduction in protein length during recent human evolution. Linkage disequilibrium and Tajima's D analyses reveal that East Asians carry exceptionally large blocks with an excess of rare variation (p < 0.05) at MUC5AC. To validate this result, we use Locityper for genotyping MUC5AC haplogroups in 2,600 unrelated samples from the 1000 Genomes Project. We observe a signature of positive selection in H1 among East Asians and a depletion of the likely ancestral haplogroup (H3). In Europeans, H3 alleles show an excess of common variation and deviate from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p < 0.05), consistent with heterozygote advantage and balancing selection. This study provides a generalizable strategy to characterize complex protein-coding VNTRs for improved disease associations.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a severe congenital anomaly often accompanied by other structural anomalies and/or neurobehavioral manifestations. Rare de novo protein-coding variants and copy-number variations contribute to CDH in the population. However, most individuals with CDH remain genetically undiagnosed. Here, we perform integrated de novo and common-variant analyses using 1,469 CDH individuals, including 1,064 child-parent trios and 6,133 ancestry-matched, unaffected controls for the genomewide association study. We identify candidate CDH variants in 15 genes, including eight novel genes, through deleterious de novo variants. We further identify two genomic loci contributing to CDH risk through common variants with similar effect sizes among Europeans and Latinx. Both loci are in putative transcriptional regulatory regions of developmental patterning genes. Estimated heritability in common variants is- 19%. Strikingly, there is no significant difference in estimated polygenic risk scores between isolated and complex CDH or between individuals harboring deleterious de novo variants and individuals without these variants. The data support a poly- genic model as part of the CDH genetic architecture.
Populations of the Eastern Highlands of Papua New Guinea (EHPNG, area 11,157 km 2 ) lived in relative isolation from the rest of the world until the mid -20 th century, and the region contains a wealth of linguistic and cultural diversity. Notably, several populations of EHPNG were devastated by an epidemic prion disease, kuru, which at its peak in the mid -twentieth century led to some villages being almost depleted of adult women. Until now, population genetic analyses to learn about genetic diversity, migration, admixture, and the impact of the kuru epidemic have been restricted to a small number of variants or samples. Here, we present a population genetic analysis of the region based on genome-wide genotype data of 943 individuals from 21 linguistic groups and 68 villages in EHPNG, including 34 villages in the South Fore linguistic group, the group most affected by kuru. We find a striking degree of genetic population structure in the relatively small region (average F ST between linguistic groups 0.024). The genetic population structure correlates well with linguistic grouping, with some noticeable exceptions that reflect the clan system of community organization that has historically existed in EHPNG. We also detect the presence of migrant individuals within the EHPNG region and observe a significant excess of females among migrants compared to among non -migrants in areas of high kuru exposure (p 1 / 4 0.0145, chi -squared test). This likely reflects the continued practice of patrilocality despite documented fears and strains placed on communities as a result of kuru and its associated skew in female incidence.
Copy -number variants (CNVs) play a substantial role in the molecular pathogenesis of hereditary disease and cancer, as well as in normal human interindividual variation. However, they are still rather difficult to identify in mainstream sequencing projects, especially involving exome sequencing, because they often occur in DNA regions that are not targeted for analysis. To overcome this problem, we developed OFF-PEAK, a user-friendly CNV detection tool that builds on a denoising approach and the use of "off-target"DNA reads, which are usually discarded by sequencing pipelines. We benchmarked OFF-PEAK on data from targeted sequencing of 96 cancer samples, as well as 130 exomes of individuals with inherited retinal disease from three different populations. For both sets of data, OFF-PEAK demonstrated excellent performance ( >95% sensitivity and >80% specificity vs. experimental validation) in detecting CNVs from in silico data alone, indicating its immediate applicability to molecular diagnosis and genetic research.
Underrepresentation in clinical genomics research limits the generalizability of findings and the benefits of scientific discoveries. We describe the impact of patient-centered, data-driven recruitment and retention strategies in a pediatric genome sequencing study. We collaborated with a stakeholder board, conducted formative research with adults whose children had undergone genomic testing, and piloted and revised study approaches and materials. Our approaches included racially, ethnically, and linguistically congruent study staff, relational interactions, study visit flexibility, and data-informed quality improvement. Of 1,656 eligible children, only 6.5% declined. Their parents/legal guardians were 76.9% non-White, 65.6% had public health insurance for the child, 49.9% lived below the federal poverty level, and 52.8% resided in a medically underserved area. Among those enrolled, 87.3% completed all study procedures. There were no sociodemographic differences between those who enrolled and declined or between those retained and lost to follow-up. We outline stakeholder-engaged approaches that may have led to the successful enrollment and retention of diverse families. These approaches may inform future research initiatives aiming to engage and retain underrepresented populations in genomics medicine research.
The C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion (HRE) is a common genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). The inheritance is autosomal dominant, but a high proportion of subjects with the mutation are simplex cases. One possible explanation is de novo expansions of unstable intermediate -length alleles (IAs). Using haplotype sharing trees (HSTs) with the haplotype analysis tool kit (HAPTK), we derived majority -based ancestral haplotypes of HRE samples and discovered that IAs containing >= 18-20 repeats share large haplotypes in common with the HRE. Using HSTs of HRE and IA samples, we demonstrate that the longer IA haplotypes are largely indistinguishable from HRE haplotypes and that several >= 18-20 IA haplotypes share over 5 Mb (>600 markers) haplotypes in common with the HRE haplotypes. These analysis tools allow physical understanding of the haplotype blocks shared with the majority -based ancestral haplotype. Our results demonstrate that the haplotypes with longer IAs belong to the same pool of haplotypes as the HRE and suggest that longer IAs represent potential premutation alleles.
Lichen planus (LP) is a T -cell -mediated inflammatory disease affecting squamous epithelia in many parts of the body, most often the skin and oral mucosa. Cutaneous LP is usually transient and oral LP (OLP) is most often chronic, so we performed a large-scale genetic and epidemiological study of LP to address whether the oral and non -oral subgroups have shared or distinct underlying pathologies and their overlap with autoimmune disease. Using lifelong records covering diagnoses, procedures, and clinic identity from 473,580 individuals in the FinnGen study, genome-wide association analyses were conducted on carefully constructed subcategories of OLP ( n 1 / 4 3,323) and non -oral LP ( n 1 / 4 4,356) and on the combined group. We identified 15 genome-wide significant associations in FinnGen and an additional 12 when meta -analyzed with UKBB (27 independent associations at 25 distinct genomic locations), most of which are shared between oral and non -oral LP. Many associations coincide with known autoimmune disease loci, consistent with the epidemiologic enrichment of LP with hypothyroidism and other autoimmune diseases. Notably, a third of the FinnGen associations demonstrate significant differences between OLP and non-OLP. We also observed a 13.6 -fold risk for tongue cancer and an elevated risk for other oral cancers in OLP, in agreement with earlier reports that connect LP with higher cancer incidence. In addition to a large-scale dissection of LP genetics and comorbidities, our study demonstrates the use of comprehensive, multidimensional health registry data to address outstanding clinical questions and reveal underlying biological mechanisms in common but understudied diseases.
Extra-axial cavernous hemangiomas (ECHs) are complex vascular lesions mainly found in the spine and cavernous sinus. Their removal poses significant risk due to their vascularity and diffuse nature, and their genetic underpinnings remain incompletely understood. Our approach involved genetic analyses on 31 tissue samples of ECHs employing whole-exome sequencing and targeted deep sequencing. We explored downstream signaling pathways, gene expression changes, and resultant phenotypic shifts induced by these mutations, both in vitro and in vivo . In our cohort, 77.4% of samples had somatic missense variants in GNA14 , GNAQ , or GJA4 . Transcriptomic analysis highlighted significant pathway upregulation, with the GNAQ c.626A >G (p.Gln209Arg) mutation elevating PI3K-AKT-mTOR and angiogenesis-related pathways, while GNA14 c.614A >T (p.Gln205Leu) mutation led to MAPK and angiogenesis-related pathway upregulation. Using a mouse xenograft model, we observed enlarged vessels from these mutations. Additionally, we initiated rapamycin treatment in a 14-year-old individual harboring the GNAQ c.626A >G (p.Gln209Arg) variant, resulting in gradual regression of cutaneous cavernous hemangiomas and improved motor strength, with minimal side effects. Understanding these mutations and their pathways provides a foundation for developing therapies for ECHs resistant to current therapies. Indeed, the administration of rapamycin in an individual within this study highlights the promise of targeted treatments in treating these complex lesions.
The ClinGen Hereditary Breast, Ovarian, and Pancreatic Cancer (HBOP) Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) is composed of internationally recognized experts in clinical genetics, molecular biology, and variant interpretation. This VCEP made specifications for the American College of Medical Genetics and Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) guidelines for the ataxia telangiectasia mutated ( ATM ) gene according to the ClinGen protocol. These gene-specific rules for ATM were modified from the ACMG/AMP guidelines and were tested against 33 ATM variants of various types and classifications in a pilot curation phase. The pilot revealed a majority agreement between the HBOP VCEP classifications and the ClinVar-deposited classifications. Six pilot variants had conflicting interpretations in ClinVar, and re-evaluation with the VCEP's ATM-specific rules resulted in four that were classified as benign, one as likely pathogenic, and one as a variant of uncertain significance (VUS) by the VCEP, improving the certainty of interpretations in the public domain. Overall, 28 of the 33 pilot variants were not VUS, leading to an 85% classification rate. The ClinGen-approved, modified rules demonstrated value for improved interpretation of variants in ATM.
As more patients receive genome-wide sequencing, the number of individuals diagnosed with multiple monogenic conditions is increasing. We sought to investigate the relative phenotypic contribution of dual diagnoses using both manual curation and computational approaches. First, we computed 1,003,236 semantic similarity scores for all possible pairs of 1,417 genes in the Developmental Disorder Gene2Phenotype (DDG2P) database using Human Phenotype Ontology terms. Next, for 62 probands with two molecular diagnoses in the Deciphering Developmental Disorders study, we computed semantic similarity scores between the probands' phenotypes and DDG2P phenotypes associated with the two disorders and compared the results with manual attribution of proband phenotypes to none, one, or both of the genes. We found a spectrum of phenotypic similarity for dual diagnoses, both across all DDG2P genes and within dual diagnosed probands, from phenotypically distinct through blended to indistinguishable conditions. Pairwise semantic similarity scores between two DDG2P genes were a good predictor of the extent of phenotypic blending observed in probands. Dual diagnoses involving genes linked with synergistic phenotypes can result in more extreme presentations while those involving antagonistic phenotypes have spuriously high pairwise semantic similarity scores despite a potentially milder atypical presentation. We suggest that the phenotypic contribution of two molecular diagnoses may contain discrete, synergistic, or antagonistic elements. Conceptual recognition of this phenotypic spectrum is important for making a final clinico-molecular diagnosis and providing accurate genetic counseling.
The calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type 2 (CAMK2) family consists of four different isozymes, encoded by four different genes-CAMK2A, CAMK2B, CAMK2G, and CAMK2D-of which the first three have been associated recently with neurodevelopmental disorders. CAMK2D is one of the major CAMK2 proteins expressed in the heart and has been associated with cardiac anomalies. Although this CAMK2 isoform is also known to be one of the major CAMK2 subtypes expressed during early brain development, it has never been linked with neurodevelopmental disorders until now. Here we show that CAMK2D plays an important role in neurodevelopment not only in mice but also in humans. We identified eight individuals harboring heterozygous variants in CAMK2D who display symptoms of intellectual disability, delayed speech, behavioral problems, and dilated cardiomyopathy. The majority of the variants tested lead to a gain of function (GoF), which appears to cause both neurological problems and dilated cardiomyopathy. In contrast, loss -of -function (LoF) variants appear to induce only neurological symptoms. Together, we describe a cohort of individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders and cardiac anomalies, harboring pathogenic variants in CAMK2D, confirming an important role for the CAMK2D isozyme in both heart and brain function.
Vitiligo is a common autoimmune disease characterized by patches of depigmented skin and overlying hair due to destruction of melanocytes in the involved regions. We investigated the relationship between vitiligo risk and vitiligo age of onset (AOO) using a vitiligo polygenic risk score that incorporated the most significant SNPs from genome-wide association studies. We find that vitiligo genetic risk and AOO are strongly inversely correlated; subjects with higher common-variant polygenic risk tend to develop vitiligo at an earlier age. Nevertheless, the correlation is not simple. In individuals who carry a single high-risk major histocompatibility complex class II haplotype, the effect of additional polygenic risk on vitiligo AOO is reduced. Particularly among those with early-AOO vitiligo (onset <= 12 years of age), genetic risk can reflect contributions from high common-variant burden but also rare variants of high effect and sometimes both. While the heritability of vitiligo is relatively high, and we here show that genetic risk factors predict vitiligo AOO, vitiligo is never congenital, and thus environmental triggers also play an important role in disease onset.
Cervical cancer is caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, has few approved targeted therapeutics, and is the most common cause of cancer death in low -resource countries. We characterized 19 cervical and four head and neck cancer cell lines using long -read DNA and RNA sequencing and identified the HPV types, HPV integration sites, chromosomal alterations, and cancer driver mutations. Structural variation analysis revealed telomeric deletions associated with DNA inversions resulting from breakage -fusion -bridge (BFB) cycles. BFB is a common mechanism of chromosomal alterations in cancer, and our study applies long -read sequencing to this important chromosomal rearrangement type. Analysis of the inversion sites revealed staggered ends consistent with exonuclease digestion of the DNA after breakage. Some BFB events are complex, involving inter- or intra-chromosomal insertions or rearrangements. None of the BFB breakpoints had telomere sequences added to resolve the dicentric chromosomes, and only one BFB breakpoint showed chromothripsis. Five cell lines have a chromosomal region 11q BFB event, with YAP1-BIRC3-BIRC2 amplification. Indeed, YAP1 amplification is associated with a 10 -year-earlier age of diagnosis of cervical cancer and is three times more common in African American women. This suggests that individuals with cervical cancer and YAP1-BIRC3-BIRC2 amplification, especially those of African ancestry, might benefit from targeted therapy. In summary, we uncovered valuable insights into the mechanisms and consequences of BFB cycles in cervical cancer using long -read sequencing.
Tauopathies are a group of neurodegenerative diseases defined by abnormal aggregates of tau, a microtubule-associated protein encoded by MAPT. MAPT expression is near absent in neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and increases during differentiation. This temporally dynamic expression pattern suggests that MAPT expression could be controlled by transcription factors and cis -regulatory elements specific to differentiated cell types. Given the relevance of MAPT expression to neurodegeneration pathogenesis, identification of such elements is relevant to understanding disease risk and pathogenesis. Here, we performed chromatin conformation assays (HiC & Capture -C), single -nucleus multiomics (RNA-seq+ATAC-seq), bulk ATAC-seq, and ChIP-seq for H3K27ac and CTCF in NPCs and differentiated neurons to nominate candidate cis -regulatory elements (cCREs). We assayed these cCREs using luciferase assays and CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) experiments to measure their effects on MAPT expression. Finally, we integrated cCRE annotations into an analysis of genetic variation in neurodegeneration-affected individuals and control subjects. We identified both proximal and distal regulatory elements for MAPT and confirmed the regulatory function for several regions, including three regions centromeric to MAPT beyond the H1/H2 haplotype inversion breakpoint. We also found that rare and predicted damaging genetic variation in nominated CREs was nominally depleted in dementia -affected individuals relative to control subjects, consistent with the hypothesis that variants that disrupt MAPT enhancer activity, and thereby reduced MAPT expression, may be protective against neurodegenerative disease. Overall, this study provides compelling evidence for pursuing detailed knowledge of CREs for genes of interest to permit better understanding of disease risk.
Our ability to determine the clinical impact of variants in 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of genes remains poor. We provide a thorough analysis of 3' UTR variants from several datasets. Variants in putative regulatory elements, including RNA -binding protein motifs, eCLIP peaks, and microRNA sites, are up to 16 times more likely than variants not in these elements to have gene expression and phenotype associations. Variants in regulatory motifs result in allele -specific protein binding in cell lines and allele -specific gene expression differences in population studies. In addition, variants in shared regions of alternatively polyadenylated isoforms and those proximal to polyA sites are more likely to affect gene expression and phenotype. Finally, pathogenic 3' UTR variants in ClinVar are up to 20 times more likely than benign variants to fall in a regulatory site. We incorporated these findings into RegVar, a software tool that interprets regulatory elements and annotations for any 3' UTR variant and predicts whether the variant is likely to affect gene expression or phenotype. This tool will help prioritize variants for experimental studies and identify pathogenic variants in individuals.
The shift to a genotype-first approach in genetic diagnostics has revolutionized our understanding of neurodevelopmental disorders, expanding both their molecular and phenotypic spectra. Kleefstra syndrome (KLEFS1) is caused by EHMT1 haploinsufficiency and exhibits broad clinical manifestations. EHMT1 encodes euchromatic histone methyltransferase-1-a pivotal component of the epigenetic machinery. We have recruited 209 individuals with a rare EHMT1 variant and performed comprehensive molecular in silico and in vitro testing alongside DNA methylation (DNAm) signature analysis for the identified variants. We (re)classified the variants as likely pathogenic/pathogenic (molecularly confirming Kleefstra syndrome) in 191 individuals. We provide an updated and broader clinical and molecular spectrum of Kleefstra syndrome, including individuals with normal intelligence and familial occurrence. Analysis of the EHMT1 variants reveals a broad range of molecular effects and their associated phenotypes, including distinct genotype-phenotype associations. Notably, we showed that disruption of the ''reader'' function of the ankyrin repeat domain by a protein altering variant (PAV) results in a KLEFS1-specific DNAm signature and milder phenotype, while disruption of only ''writer'' methyltransferase activity of the SET domain does not result in KLEFS1 DNAm signature or typical KLEFS1 phenotype. Similarly, N-terminal truncating variants result in a mild phenotype without the DNAm signature. We demonstrate how comprehensive variant analysis can provide insights into pathogenesis of the disorder and DNAm signature. In summary, this study presents a comprehensive overview of KLEFS1 and EHMT1, revealing its broader spectrum and deepening our understanding of its molecular mechanisms, thereby informing accurate variant interpretation, counseling, and clinical management.
Trithorax-related H3K4 methyltransferases, KMT2C and KMT2D, are critical epigenetic modifiers. Haploinsufficiency of KMT2C was only recently recognized as a cause of neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD), so the clinical and molecular spectrums of the KMT2C-related NDD (now designated as Kleefstra syndrome 2) are largely unknown. We ascertained 98 individuals with rare KMT2C variants, including 75 with protein-truncating variants (PTVs). Notably, similar to 15% of KMT2C PTVs were inherited. Although the most highly expressed KMT2C transcript consists of only the last four exons, pathogenic PTVs were found in almost all the exons of this large gene. KMT2C variant interpretation can be challenging due to segmental duplications and clonal hematopoesis-induced artifacts. Using samples from 27 affected individuals, divided into discovery and validation cohorts, we generated a moderate strength disorder-specific KMT2C DNA methylation (DNAm) signature and demonstrate its utility in classifying non-truncating variants. Based on 81 individuals with pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants, we demonstrate that the KMT2C-related NDD is characterized by developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral and psychiatric problems, hypotonia, seizures, short stature, and other comorbidities. The facial module of PhenoScore, applied to photographs of 34 affected individuals, reveals that the KMT2C-related facial gestalt is significantly different from the general NDD population. Finally, using PhenoScore and DNAm signatures, we demonstrate that the KMT2C-related NDD is clinically and epigenetically distinct from Kleefstra and Kabuki syndromes. Overall, we define the clinical features, molecular spectrum, and DNAm signature of the KMT2C-related NDD and demonstrate they are distinct from Kleefstra and Kabuki syndromes highlighting the need to rename this condition.
Female infertility is a common and complex health problem affecting millions of women worldwide. While multiple factors can contribute to this condition, the underlying cause remains elusive in up to 15%-30% of affected individuals. In our large genomewide association study (GWAS) of 22,849 women with infertility and 198,989 control individuals from the Finnish population cohort FinnGen, we unveil a landscape of genetic factors associated with the disorder. Our recessive analysis identified a low-frequency stop- gained mutation in TATA-box binding protein-like 2 ( TBPL2 ; c.895A>T [p.Arg299Ter]; minor-allele frequency [MAF] = 1.2%) with an impact comparable to highly penetrant monogenic mutations (odds ratio [OR] = 650, p = 4.1 3 10(-25)). While previous studies have linked the orthologous gene to anovulation and sterility in knockout mice, the severe consequence of the p.Arg299Ter variant was evidenced by individuals carrying two copies of that variant having significantly fewer offspring (average of 0.16) compared to women belonging to the other genotype groups (average of 1.75 offspring, p = 1.4 3 10(-15)). Notably, all homozygous women who had given birth had received infertility therapy. Moreover, our age-stratified analyses identified three additional genome-wide significant loci. Two loci were associated with early-onset infertility (diagnosed before age 30), located near CHEK2 and within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region. The third locus, associated with late-onset infertility, had its lead SNP located in an intron of a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) gene. Taken together, our data highlight the significance of rare recessive alleles in shaping female infertility risk. The results further provide evidence supporting specific age-dependent mechanisms underlying this complex disorder.
Porokeratosis is a clonal keratinization disorder characterized by solitary, linearly arranged, or generally distributed multiple skin lesions. Previous studies showed that genetic alterations in MVK , PMVK , MVD , or FDPS -genes in the mevalonate pathway-cause hereditary porokeratosis, with skin lesions harboring germline and lesion -specific somatic variants on opposite alleles. Here, we identified non -hereditary porokeratosis associated with epigenetic silencing of FDFT1 , another gene in the mevalonate pathway. Skin lesions of the generalized form had germline and lesion -specific somatic variants on opposite alleles in FDFT1 , representing FDFT1 -associated hereditary porokeratosis identified in this study. Conversely, lesions of the solitary or linearly arranged localized form had somatic bi-allelic promoter hypermethylation or mono -allelic promoter hypermethylation with somatic genetic alterations on opposite alleles in FDFT1 , indicating non -hereditary porokeratosis. FDFT1 localization was uniformly diminished within the lesions, and lesion -derived keratinocytes showed cholesterol dependence for cell growth and altered expression of genes related to cell -cycle and epidermal development, confirming that lesions form by clonal expansion of FDFT1-deficient keratinocytes. In some individuals with the localized form, genespecific promoter hypermethylation of FDFT1 was detected in morphologically normal epidermis adjacent to methylation-related lesions but not distal to these lesions, suggesting that asymptomatic somatic epigenetic mosaicism of FDFT1 predisposes certain skin areas to the disease. Finally, consistent with its genetic etiology, topical statin treatment ameliorated lesions in FDFT1-deficient porokeratosis. In conclusion, we identified bi-allelic genetic and/or epigenetic alterations of FDFT1 as a cause of porokeratosis and shed light on the pathogenesis of skin mosaicism involving clonal expansion of epigenetically altered cells.
Population-level genetic studies are overwhelmingly biased toward European ancestries. Transferring genetic predictions from European ancestries to other ancestries results in a substantial loss of accuracy. Yet, it remains unclear how much various genetic factors, such as causal effect differences, linkage disequilibrium (LD) differences, or allele frequency differences, contribute to the loss of prediction accuracy across ancestries. In this study, we used gene expression levels in lymphoblastoid cell lines to understand how much each genetic factor contributes to lowered portability of gene expression prediction from European to African ancestries. We found that cis- genetic effects on gene expression are highly similar between European and African individuals. However, we found that allele frequency differences of causal variants have a striking impact on prediction portability. For example, portability is reduced by more than 32% when the causal cis- variant is common (minor allele frequency, MAF >5%) in European samples (training population) but is rarer (MAF <5%) in African samples (prediction population). While large allele frequency differences can decrease portability through increasing LD differences, we also determined that causal allele frequency can significantly impact portability when the impact from LD is substantially controlled. This observation suggests that improving statistical fine-mapping alone does not overcome the loss of portability resulting from differences in causal allele frequency. We conclude that causal cis- eQTL effects are highly similar in European and African individuals, and allele frequency differences have a large impact on the accuracy of gene expression prediction.
The homologous genes GTPBP1 and GTPBP2 encode GTP-binding proteins 1 and 2, which are involved in ribosomal homeostasis. Pathogenic variants in GTPBP2 were recently shown to be an ultra -rare cause of neurodegenerative or neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Until now, no human phenotype has been linked to GTPBP1. Here, we describe individuals carrying bi-allelic GTPBP1 variants that display an identical phenotype with GTPBP2 and characterize the overall spectrum of GTP-binding protein (1/2) -related disorders. In this study, 20 individuals from 16 families with distinct NDDs and syndromic facial features were investigated by whole-exome (WES) or whole-genome (WGS) sequencing. To assess the functional impact of the identified genetic variants, semi -quantitative PCR, western blot, and ribosome profiling assays were performed in fibroblasts from affected individuals. We also investigated the effect of reducing expression of CG2017, an ortholog of human GTPBP1/2, in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Individuals with bi-allelic GTPBP1 or GTPBP2 variants presented with microcephaly, profound neurodevelopmental impairment, pathognomonic craniofacial features, and ectodermal defects. Abnormal vision and/or hearing, progressive spasticity, choreoathetoid movements, refractory epilepsy, and brain atrophy were part of the core phenotype of this syndrome. Cell line studies identified a loss -of -function (LoF) impact of the disease -associated variants but no significant abnormalities on ribosome profiling. Reduced expression of CG2017 isoforms was associated with locomotor impairment in Drosophila. In conclusion, bi-allelic GTPBP1 and GTPBP2 LoF variants cause an identical, distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome. Mutant CG2017 knockout flies display motor impairment, highlighting the conserved role for GTPbinding proteins in CNS development across species.
Population history-focused DNA and ancient DNA (aDNA) research in Africa has dramatically increased in the past decade, enabling increasingly fine-scale investigations into the continent's past. However, while international interest in human genomics research in Africa grows, major structural barriers limit the ability of African scholars to lead and engage in such research and impede local communities from partnering with researchers and benefitting from research outcomes. Because conversations about research on African people and their past are often held outside Africa and exclude African voices, an important step for African DNA and aDNA research is moving these conversations to the continent. In May 2023 we held the DNAirobi workshop in Nairobi, Kenya and here we synthesize what emerged most prominently in our discussions. We propose an ideal vision for population history-focused DNA and aDNA research in Africa in ten years' time and acknowledge that to realize this future, we need to chart a path connecting a series of "landmarks"that represent points of consensus in our discussions. These include effective communication across multiple audiences, reframed relationships and capacity building, and action toward structural changes that support science and beyond. We concluded there is no single path to creating an equitable and self-sustaining research ecosystem, but rather many possible routes linking these landmarks. Here we share our diverse perspectives as geneticists, anthropologists, archaeologists, museum curators, and educators to articulate challenges and opportunities for African DNA and aDNA research and share an initial map toward a more inclusive and equitable future.
The Rab family of guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) includes key regulators of intracellular transport and membrane trafficking targeting specific steps in exocytic, endocytic, and recycling pathways. DENND5B (Rab6-interacting Protein 1B -like protein, R6IP1B) is the longest isoform of DENND5, an evolutionarily conserved DENN domain -containing guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that is highly expressed in the brain. Through exome sequencing and international matchmaking platforms, we identified five de novo variants in DENND5B in a cohort of five unrelated individuals with neurodevelopmental phenotypes featuring cognitive impairment, dysmorphism, abnormal behavior, variable epilepsy, white matter abnormalities, and cortical gyration defects. We used biochemical assays and confocal microscopy to assess the impact of DENND5B variants on protein accumulation and distribution. Then, exploiting fluorescent lipid cargoes coupled to high -content imaging and analysis in living cells, we investigated whether DENND5B variants affected the dynamics of vesicle -mediated intracellular transport of specific cargoes. We further generated an in silico model to investigate the consequences of DENND5B variants on the DENND5B-RAB39A interaction. Biochemical analysis showed decreased protein levels of DENND5B mutants in various cell types. Functional investigation of DENND5B variants revealed defective intracellular vesicle trafficking, with significant impairment of lipid uptake and distribution. Although none of the variants affected the DENND5B-RAB39A interface, all were predicted to disrupt protein folding. Overall, our findings indicate that DENND5B variants perturb intracellular membrane trafficking pathways and cause a complex neurodevelopmental syndrome with variable epilepsy and white matter involvement.
Pathogenic variants in multiple genes on the X chromosome have been implicated in syndromic and non-syndromic intellectual disability disorders. ZFX on Xp22.11 encodes a transcription factor that has been linked to diverse processes including oncogenesis and development, but germline variants have not been characterized in association with disease. Here, we present clinical and molecular characterization of 18 individuals with germline ZFX variants. Exome or genome sequencing revealed 11 variants in 18 subjects (14 males and 4 females) from 16 unrelated families. Four missense variants were identified in 11 subjects, with seven truncation variants in the remaining individuals. Clinical findings included developmental delay/intellectual disability, behavioral abnormalities, hypotonia, and congenital anomalies. Overlapping and recurrent facial features were identified in all subjects, including thickening and medial broadening of eyebrows, variations in the shape of the face, external eye abnormalities, smooth and/or long philtrum, and ear abnormalities. Hyperparathyroidism was found in four families with missense variants, and enrichment of different tumor types was observed. In molecular studies, DNA -binding domain variants elicited differential expression of a small set of target genes relative to wild -type ZFX in cultured cells, suggesting a gain or loss of transcriptional activity. Additionally, a zebrafish model of ZFX loss displayed an altered behavioral phenotype, providing additional evidence for the functional significance of ZFX . Our clinical and experimental data support that variants in ZFX are associated with an X -linked intellectual disability syndrome characterized by a recurrent facial gestalt, neurocognitive and behavioral abnormalities, and an increased risk for congenital anomalies and hyperparathyroidism.
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a rare atopic disorder associated with esophageal dysfunction, including difficulty swallowing, food impaction, and inflammation, that develops in a small subset of people with food allergies. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified 9 independent EoE risk loci reaching genome-wide significance (p < 5 3 10(-8)) and 27 additional loci of suggestive significance (5 3 10(-8) < p < 1 3 10(-5)). In the current study, we perform linkage disequilibrium (LD) expansion of these loci to nominate a set of 531 variants that are potentially causal. To systematically interrogate the gene regulatory activity of these variants, we designed a massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA) containing the alleles of each variant within their genomic sequence context cloned into a GFP reporter library. Analysis of reporter gene expression in TE-7, HaCaT, and Jurkat cells revealed cell -type -specific gene regulation. We identify 32 allelic enhancer variants, representing 6 genome-wide significant EoE loci and 7 suggestive EoE loci, that regulate reporter gene expression in a genotype -dependent manner in at least one cellular context. By annotating these variants with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and chromatin looping data in related tissues and cell types, we identify putative target genes affected by genetic variation in individuals with EoE. Transcription factor enrichment analyses reveal possible roles for cell -type -specific regulators, including GATA3. Our approach reduces the large set of EoE-associated variants to a set of 32 with allelic regulatory activity, providing functional into the effects of variation in this disease.
Whole-skin DNA methylation variation has been implicated in several diseases, including melanoma, but its genetic basis has not yet been fully characterized. Using bulk skin tissue samples from 414 healthy female UK twins, we performed twin-based heritability and methylation quantitative trait loci (meQTL) analyses for >400,000 DNA methylation sites. We find that the human skin DNA methylome is on average less heritable than previously estimated in blood and other tissues (mean heritability: 10.02%). meQTL analysis identified local genetic effects influencing DNA methylation at 18.8% (76,442) of tested CpG sites, as well as 1,775 CpG sites associated with at least one distal genetic variant. As a functional follow-up, we performed skin expression QTL (eQTL) analyses in a partially overlapping sample of 604 female twins. Colocalization analysis identified over 3,500 shared genetic effects affecting thousands of CpG sites (10,067) and genes (4,475). Mediation analysis of putative colocalized gene-CpG pairs identified 114 genes with evidence for eQTL effects being mediated by DNA methylation in skin, including in genes implicating skin disease such as ALOX12 and CSPG4. We further explored the relevance of skin meQTLs to skin disease and found that skin meQTLs and CpGs under genetic influence were enriched for multiple skin- related genome-wide and epigenome-wide association signals, including for melanoma and psoriasis. Our findings give insights into the regulatory landscape of epigenomic variation in skin.
Large-scale, multi-ethnic whole-genome sequencing (WGS) studies, such as the National Human Genome Research Institute Genome Sequencing Program's Centers for Common Disease Genomics (CCDG), play an important role in increasing diversity for genetic research. Before performing association analyses, assessing Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) is a crucial step in quality control procedures to remove low quality variants and ensure valid downstream analyses. Diverse WGS studies contain ancestrally heterogeneous samples; however, commonly used HWE methods assume that the samples are homogeneous. Therefore, directly applying these to the whole dataset can yield statistically invalid results. To account for this heterogeneity, HWE can be tested on subsets of samples that have genetically homogeneous ancestries and the results aggregated at each variant. To facilitate valid HWE subset testing, we developed a semi-supervised learning approach that predicts homogeneous ancestries based on the genotype. This method provides a convenient tool for estimating HWE in the presence of population structure and missing self-reported race and ethnicities in diverse WGS studies. In addition, assessing HWE within the homogeneous ancestries provides reliable HWE estimates that will directly benefit downstream analyses, including association analyses in WGS studies. We applied our proposed method on the CCDG dataset, predicting homogeneous genetic ancestry groups for 60,545 multi-ethnic WGS samples to assess HWE within each group.
Sperm production and function require the correct establishment of DNA methylation patterns in the germline. Here, we examined the genome-wide DNA methylation changes during human spermatogenesis and its alterations in disturbed spermatogenesis. We found that spermatogenesis is associated with remodeling of the methylome, comprising a global decline in DNA methylation in primary spermatocytes followed by selective remethylation, resulting in a spermatids/sperm-specific methylome. Hypomethylated regions in spermatids/sperm were enriched in specific transcription factor binding sites for DMRT and SOX family members and spermatid-specific genes. Intriguingly, while SINEs displayed differential methylation throughout spermatogenesis, LINEs appeared to be protected from changes in DNA methylation. In disturbed spermatogenesis, germ cells exhibited considerable DNA methylation changes, which were significantly enriched at transposable elements and genes involved in spermatogenesis. We detected hypomethylation in SVA and L1HS in disturbed spermatogenesis, suggesting an association between the abnormal programming of these regions and failure of germ cells progressing beyond meiosis.
Heterozygous variants in SLC6A1 , encoding the GAT -1 GABA transporter, are associated with seizures, developmental delay, and autism. The majority of affected individuals carry missense variants, many of which are recurrent germline de novo mutations, raising the possibility of gain -of -function or dominant -negative effects. To understand the functional consequences, we performed an in vitro GABA uptake assay for 213 unique variants, including 24 control variants. De novo variants consistently resulted in a decrease in GABA uptake, in keeping with haploinsufficiency underlying all neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Where present, ClinVar pathogenicity reports correlated well with GABA uptake data; the functional data can inform future reports for the remaining 72% of unscored variants. Surface localization was assessed for 86 variants; two-thirds of loss -of -function missense variants prevented GAT -1 from being present on the membrane while GAT -1 was on the surface but with reduced activity for the remaining third. Surprisingly, recurrent de novo missense variants showed moderate loss -of -function effects that reduced GABA uptake with no evidence for dominant -negative or gain -of -function effects. Using linear regression across multiple missense severity scores to extrapolate the functional data to all potential SLC6A1 missense variants, we observe an abundance of GAT -1 residues that are sensitive to substitution. The extent of this missense vulnerability accounts for the clinically observed missense enrichment; overlap with hypermutable CpG sites accounts for the recurrent missense variants. Strategies to increase the expression of the wild -type SLC6A1 allele are likely to be beneficial across neurodevelopmental disorders, though the developmental stage and extent of required rescue remain unknown.
Efforts to implement and evaluate genome sequencing (GS) as a screening tool for newborns and infants are expanding worldwide. The first iteration of the BabySeq Project (2015-2019), a randomized controlled trial of newborn sequencing, produced novel evidence on medical, behavioral, and economic outcomes. The second iteration of BabySeq, which began participant recruitment in January 2023, examines GS outcomes in a larger, more diverse cohort of more than 500 infants up to one year of age recruited from pediatric clinics at several sites across the United States. The trial aims for families who self-identify as Black/African American or Hispanic/Latino to make up more than 50% of final enrollment, and key aspects of the trial design were co-developed with a community advisory board. All enrolled families receive genetic counseling and a family history report. Half of enrolled infants are randomized to receive GS with comprehensive interpretation of pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in more than 4,300 genes associated with childhood-onset and actionable adult-onset conditions, as well as larger-scale chromosomal copy number variants classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. GS result reports include variants associated with disease (Mendelian disease risks) and carrier status of autosomal-recessive and X-linked disorders. Investigators evaluate the utility and impacts of implementing a GS screening program in a diverse cohort of infants using medical record review and longitudinal parent surveys. In this perspective, we describe the rationale for the second iteration of the BabySeq Project, the outcomes being assessed, and the key decisions collaboratively made by the study team and community advisory board.
We propose TetraHer, a method for estimating the liability heritability of binary phenotypes. TetraHer has five key features. First, it can be applied to data from complex pedigrees that contain multiple types of relationships. Second, it can correct for ascertainment of cases or controls. Third, it can accommodate covariates. Fourth, it can model the contribution of common environment. Fifth, it produces a likelihood that can be used for significance testing. We first demonstrate the validity of TetraHer on simulated data. We then use TetraHer to estimate liability heritability for 229 codes from the tenth International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10). We identify 107 codes with significant heritability (p < 0.05/229), which can be used in future analyses for investigating the genetic architecture of human diseases.
Variants that alter gene splicing are estimated to comprise up to a third of all disease-causing variants, yet they are hard to predict from DNA sequencing data alone. To overcome this, many groups are incorporating RNA-based analyses, which are resource intensive, particularly for diagnostic laboratories. There are thousands of functionally validated variants that induce mis-splicing; however, this information is not consolidated, and they are under-represented in ClinVar, which presents a barrier to variant interpretation and can result in duplication of validation efforts. To address this issue, we developed SpliceVarDB, an online database consolidating over 50,000 variants assayed for their effects on splicing in over 8,000 human genes. We evaluated over 500 published data sources and established a spliceogenicity scale to standardize, harmonize, and consolidate variant validation data generated by a range of experimental protocols. According to the strength of their supporting evidence, variants were classified as "splice-altering"(similar to 25%), "not splice-altering"(similar to 25%), and "low-frequency splice-altering"(similar to 50%), which correspond to weak or indeterminate evidence of spliceogenicity. Importantly, 55% of the splice-altering variants in SpliceVarDB are outside the canonical splice sites (5.6% are deep intronic). These variants can support the variant curation diagnostic pathway and can be used to provide the high-quality data necessary to develop more accurate in silico splicing predictors. The variants are accessible through an online platform, SpliceVarDB, with additional features for visualization, variant information, in silico predictions, and validation metrics. SpliceVarDB is a very large collection of splice-altering variants and is available at https://splicevardb.org.
Since genotype imputation was introduced, researchers have been relying on the estimated imputation quality from imputation software to perform post -imputation quality control (QC). However, this quality estimate (denoted as Rsq) performs less well for lower -frequency variants. We recently published MagicalRsq, a machine -learning -based imputation quality calibration, which leverages additional typed markers from the same cohort and outperforms Rsq as a QC metric. In this work, we extended the original MagicalRsq to allow cross -cohort model training and named the new model MagicalRsq-X. We removed the cohort -specific estimated minor allele frequency and included linkage disequilibrium scores and recombination rates as additional features. Leveraging whole-genome sequencing data from TOPMed, specifically participants in the BioMe, JHS, WHI, and MESA studies, we performed comprehensive cross -cohort evaluations for predominantly European and African ancestral individuals based on their inferred global ancestry with the 1000 Genomes and Human Genome Diversity Project data as reference. Our results suggest MagicalRsq-X outperforms Rsq in almost every setting, with 7.3%-14.4% improvement in squared Pearson correlation with true R 2 , corresponding to 85-218 K variant gains. We further developed a metric to quantify the genetic distances of a target cohort relative to a reference cohort and showed that such metric largely explained the performance of MagicalRsq-X models. Finally, we found MagicalRsq-X saved up to 53 known genome-wide significant variants in one of the largest blood cell trait GWASs that would be missed using the original Rsq for QC. In conclusion, MagicalRsqX shows superiority for post -imputation QC and benefits genetic studies by distinguishing well and poorly imputed lower -frequency variants.
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a major risk factor for heart failure (HF) and has elevated incidence among individuals with HF. Since genetics and HF can independently influence T2D, collider bias may occur when T2D (i.e., collider) is controlled for by design or analysis. Thus, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of diabetes-related HF with correction for collider bias. We first performed a GWAS of HF to identify genetic instrumental variables (GIVs) for HF and to enable bidirectional Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis between T2D and HF. We identified 61 genomic loci, significantly associated with all-cause HF in 114,275 individuals with HF and over 1.5 million controls of European ancestry. Using a two-sample bidirectional MR approach with 59 and 82 GIVs for HF and T2D, respectively, we estimated that T2D increased HF risk (odds ratio [OR] 1.07, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.04-1.10), while HF also increased T2D risk (OR 1.60, 95% CI 1.36-1.88). Then we performed a GWAS of diabetes-related HF corrected for collider bias due to the study design of index cases. After removing the spurious association of TCF7L2 locus due to collider bias, we identified two genome-wide significant loci close to PITX2 (chromosome 4) and CDKN2B- AS1 (chromosome 9) associated with diabetes-related HF in the Million Veteran Program and replicated the associations in the UK Biobank. Our MR findings provide strong evidence that HF increases T2D risk. As a result, collider bias leads to spurious genetic associations of diabetes-related HF, which can be effectively corrected to identify true positive loci.
Balancing the tradeoff between quantity and quality of phenotypic data is critical in omics studies. Measurements below the limit of quantification (BLQ) are often tagged in quality control fields, but these flags are currently underutilized in human genetics studies. Extreme phenotype sampling is advantageous for mapping rare variant effects. We hypothesize that genetic drivers, along with environmental and technical factors, contribute to the presence of BLQ flags. Here, we introduce "hypometric genetics"(hMG) analysis and uncover a genetic basis for BLQ flags, indicating an additional source of genetic signal for genetic discovery, especially from phenotypic extremes. Applying our hMG approach to n 1 / 4 227,469 UK Biobank individuals with metabolomic profiles, we reveal more than 5% heritability for BLQ flags and report biologically relevant associations, for example, at APOC3, APOA5, and PDE3B loci. For common variants, polygenic scores trained only for BLQ flags predict the corresponding quantitative traits with 91% accuracy, validating the genetic basis. For rare coding variant associations, we find an asymmetric 65.4% higher enrichment of metabolite-lowering associations for BLQ flags, highlighting the impact of putative loss-of-function variants with large effects on phenotypic extremes. Joint analysis of binarized BLQ flags and the corresponding quantitative metabolite measurements improves power in Bayesian rare variant aggregation tests, resulting in an average of 181% more prioritized genes. Our approach is broadly applicable to omics profiling. Overall, our results underscore the benefit of integrating quality control flags and quantitative measurements and highlight the advantage of joint analysis of population-based samples and phenotypic extremes in human genetics studies.
Tumor mutational burden (TMB), the total number of somatic mutations in the tumor, and copy number burden (CNB), the corresponding measure of aneuploidy, are established fundamental somatic features and emerging biomarkers for immunotherapy. However, the genetic and non -genetic influences on TMB/CNB and, critically, the manner by which they influence patient outcomes remain poorly understood. Here, we present a large germline-somatic study of TMB/CNB with >23,000 individuals across 17 cancer types, of which 12,000 also have extensive clinical, treatment, and overall survival (OS) measurements available. We report dozens of clinical associations with TMB/CNB, observing older age and male sex to have a strong effect on TMB and weaker impact on CNB. We additionally identified significant germline influences on TMB/CNB, including fine -scale European ancestry and germline polygenic risk scores (PRSs) for smoking, tanning, white blood cell counts, and educational attainment. We quantify the causal effect of exposures on somatic mutational processes using Mendelian randomization. Many of the identified features associated with TMB/CNB were additionally associated with OS for individuals treated at a single tertiary cancer center. For individuals receiving immunotherapy, we observed a complex relationship between PRSs for educational attainment, self -reported college attainment, TMB, and survival, suggesting that the influence of this biomarker may be substantially modified by socioeconomic status. While the accumulation of somatic alterations is a stochastic process, our work demonstrates that it can be shaped by host characteristics including germline genetics.
In silico variant effect predictions are available for nearly all missense variants but played a minimal role in clinical variant classification because they were deemed to provide only supporting evidence. Recently, the ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation (SVI) Working Group updated recommendations for variant effect prediction use. By analyzing control pathogenic and benign variants across all genes, they were able to compute evidence strength for predictor score intervals with some intervals generating moderate, strong, or even very strong evidence. However, this genome-wide approach could obscure heterogeneous predictor performance in different genes. We quantified the gene-by-gene performance of two top predictors, REVEL and BayesDel, by analyzing control variants in each predictor score interval in 3,668 disease-relevant genes. Approximately 10% of intervals had sufficient control variants for analysis, and-70% of these intervals exceeded the maximum number of incorrect predictions implied by the SVI recommendations. These trending discordant intervals arose owing to the divergence of the gene-specific distribution of predictions from the genome-wide distribution, suggesting that gene-specific calibration is needed in many cases. Approximately 22% of ClinVar missense variants of uncertain significance in genes we analyzed (REVEL = 100,629, BayesDel = 71,928) had predictions in trending discordant intervals. Thus, genome-wide calibrations could result in many variants receiving inappropriate evidence strength. To facilitate a review of the SVI's calibrations, we developed a web application enabling visualization of gene-specific predictions and trending concordant and discordant intervals.
Recent positive selection can result in an excess of long identity-by-descent (IBD) haplotype segments overlapping a locus. The statistical methods that we propose here address three major objectives in studying selective sweeps: scanning for regions of interest, identifying possible sweeping alleles, and estimating a selection coefficients. First, we implement a selection scan to locate regions with excess IBD rates. Second, we estimate the allele frequency and location of an unknown sweeping allele by aggregating over variants that are more abundant in an inferred outgroup with excess IBD rate versus the rest of the sample. Third, we propose an estimator for the selection coefficient and quantify uncertainty using the parametric bootstrap. Comparing against state-of-the-art methods in extensive simulations, we show that our methods are more precise at estimating s when s >= 0:015. We also show that our 95% confidence intervals contain s in nearly 95% of our simulations. We apply these methods to study positive selection in European ancestry samples from the Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine project. We analyze eight loci where IBD rates are more than four standard deviations above the genome-wide median, including LCT where the maximum IBD rate is 35 standard deviations above the genome-wide median. Overall, we present robust and accurate approaches to study recent adaptive evolution without knowing the identity of the causal allele or using time series data.
Genetic variants that affect mRNA splicing are a major cause of hereditary disorders, but the spliceogenicity of variants is challenging to predict. RNA diagnostics of clinically accessible tissues enable rapid functional characterization of splice -altering variants within their natural genetic context. However, this analysis cannot be offered to all individuals as one in five human disease genes are not expressed in easily accessible cell types. To overcome this problem, we have used CRISPR activation (CRISPRa) based on a dCas9-VPR mRNA-based delivery platform to induce expression of the gene of interest in skin fibroblasts from individuals with suspected monogenic disorders. Using this ex vivo splicing assay, we characterized the splicing patterns associated with germline variants in the myelin protein zero gene (MPZ), which is exclusively expressed in Schwann cells of the peripheral nerves, and the spastin gene (SPAST), which is predominantly expressed in the central nervous system. After overnight incubation, CRISPRa strongly upregulated MPZ and SPAST transcription in skin fibroblasts, which enabled splice variant profiling using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, next -generation sequencing, and long -read sequencing. Our investigations show proof of principle of a promising genetic diagnostic tool that involves CRISPRa to activate gene expression in easily accessible cells to study the functional impact of genetic variants. The procedure is easy to perform in a diagnostic laboratory with equipment and reagents all readily available.
A core task when establishing the strength of evidence for a gene's role in a monogenic disorder is determining the appropriate disease entity to curate. Establishing this concept determines which evidence can be applied and quantified toward the final gene-disease validity, variant pathogenicity, or actionability classification. Genes with implications in more than one phenotype can necessitate a process of lumping and splitting, disease reorganization, and updates to disease nomenclature. Reappraisal of the names that are used as labels for disease entities is therefore a necessary and perpetual process. The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen), in collaboration with representatives from Monarch Disease Ontology (Mondo) and Online Inheritance in Man (OMIM), formed the Disease Naming Advisory Committee (DNAC) to develop guidance for groups faced with the need to establish the "curated disease entity"for genephenotype validity and variant pathogenicity and to update disease names for clinical use when necessary. The objective of this group was to harmonize guidance for disease naming across these nosologic entities and among ClinGen curation groups in collaboration with other disease-related professional groups. Here, we present the initial guidance developed by the DNAC with representative examples provided by the ClinGen expert panels and working groups that warranted nomenclature updates. We also discuss the broader implications of these efforts and their benefits for harmonization of gene-disease validity curation. Overall, this work sheds light on current inconsistencies and/or discrepancies and is designed to engage the broader community on how ClinGen defines monogenic disorders using a consistent approach for disease naming.
There is mounting evidence of the value of clinical genome sequencing (cGS) in individuals with suspected rare genetic disease (RGD), but cGS performance and impact on clinical care in a diverse population drawn from both high-income countries (HICs) and low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) has not been investigated. The iHope program, a philanthropic cGS initiative, established a network of 24 clinical sites in eight countries through which it provided cGS to individuals with signs or symptoms of an RGD and constrained access to molecular testing. A total of 1,004 individuals (median age, 6.5 years; 53.5% male) with diverse ancestral backgrounds (51.8% non-majority European) were assessed from June 2016 to September 2021. The diagnostic yield of cGS was 41.4% (416/1,004), with individuals from LMIC sites 1.7 times more likely to receive a positive test result compared to HIC sites (LMIC 56.5% [195/345] vs. HIC 33.5% [221/659], OR 2.6, 95% CI 1.9-3.4, p < 0.0001). A change in diagnostic evaluation occurred in 76.9% (514/668) of individuals. Change of management, inclusive of specialty referrals, imaging and testing, therapeutic interventions, and palliative care, was reported in 41.4% (285/694) of individuals, which increased to 69.2% (480/694) when genetic counseling and avoidance of additional testing were also included. Individuals from LMIC sites were as likely as their HIC counterparts to experience a change in diagnostic evaluation (OR 6.1, 95% CI 1.1-infinity, p = 0.05) and change of management (OR 0.9, 95% CI 0.5-1.3, p = 0.49). Increased access to genomic testing may support diagnostic equity and the reduction of global health care disparities.
Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 30 end of genes may escape nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). PTVs in the NMD-escape region (PTVescs) can cause Mendelian disease but are difficult to interpret given their varying impact on protein function. Previously, PTVesc burden was assessed in an epilepsy cohort, but no large-scale analysis has systematically evaluated these variants in rare disease. We performed a retrospective analysis of 29,031 neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) parent -offspring trios referred for clinical exome sequencing to identify PTVesc de novo mutations (DNMs). We identified 1,376 PTVesc DNMs and 133 genes that were significantly enriched (binomial p < 0.001). The PTVesc-enriched genes included those with PTVescs previously described to cause dominant Mendelian disease (e.g., SEMA6B, PPM1D, and DAGLA). We annotated ClinVar variants for PTVescs and identified 948 genes with at least one highconfidence pathogenic variant. Twenty-two known Mendelian PTVesc-enriched genes had no prior evidence of PTVesc-associated disease. We found 22 additional PTVesc-enriched genes that are not well established to be associated with Mendelian disease, several of which showed phenotypic similarity between individuals harboring PTVesc variants in the same gene. Four individuals with PTVesc mutations in RAB1A had similar phenotypes including NDD and spasticity. PTVesc mutations in IRF2BP1 were found in two individuals who each had severe immunodeficiency manifesting in NDD. Three individuals with PTVesc mutations in LDB1 all had NDD and multiple congenital anomalies. Using a large-scale, systematic analysis of DNMs, we extend the mutation spectrum for known Mendelian disease -associated genes and identify potentially novel disease -associated genes.
Transcriptomics is a powerful tool for unraveling the molecular effects of genetic variants and disease diagnosis. Prior studies have demonstrated that choice of genome build impacts variant interpretation and diagnostic yield for genomic analyses. To identify the extent genome build also impacts transcriptomics analyses, we studied the effect of the hg19, hg38, and CHM13 genome builds on expression quantification and outlier detection in 386 rare disease and familial control samples from both the Undiagnosed Diseases Network and Genomics Research to Elucidate the Genetics of Rare Disease Consortium. Across six routinely collected biospecimens, 61% of quantified genes were not influenced by genome build. However, we identified 1,492 genes with build-dependent quantification, 3,377 genes with build-exclusive expression, and 9,077 genes with annotation-specific expression across six routinely collected biospecimens, including 566 clinically relevant and 512 known OMIM genes. Further, we demonstrate that between builds for a given gene, a larger difference in quantification is well correlated with a larger change in expression outlier calling. Combined, we provide a database of genes impacted by build choice and recommend that transcriptomics-guided analyses and diagnoses are cross referenced with these data for robustness.
Mutations in proteasome beta-subunits or their chaperone and regulatory proteins are associated with proteasome-associated autoinflammatory disorders (PRAAS). We studied six unrelated infants with three de novo heterozygous missense variants in PSMB10, encoding the proteasome beta 2i-subunit. Individuals presented with T-B-NK +/- severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) and clinical features suggestive of Omenn syndrome, including diarrhea, alopecia, and desquamating erythematous rash. Remaining T cells had limited T cell receptor repertoires, a skewed memory phenotype, and an elevated CD4/CD8 ratio. Bone marrow examination indicated severely impaired B cell maturation with limited V(D)J recombination. All infants received an allogeneic stem cell transplant and exhibited a variety of severe inflammatory complications thereafter, with 2 peri-transplant and 2 delayed deaths. The single long-term transplant survivor showed evidence for genetic rescue through revertant mosaicism overlapping the affected PSMB10 locus. The identified variants (c.166G>C [p.Asp56His] and c.601G>A/c.601G>C [p.Gly201Arg]) were predicted in silico to profoundly disrupt 20S immunoproteasome structure through impaired beta-ring/beta-ring interaction. Our identification of PSMB10 mutations as a cause of SCID-Omenn syndrome reinforces the connection between PRAAS-related diseases and SCID.
Gene misexpression is the aberrant transcription of a gene in a context where it is usually inactive. Despite its known pathological consequences in specific rare diseases, we have a limited understanding of its wider prevalence and mechanisms in humans. To address this, we analyzed gene misexpression in 4,568 whole-blood bulk RNA sequencing samples from INTERVAL study blood donors. We found that while individual misexpression events occur rarely, in aggregate they were found in almost all samples and a third of inactive protein-coding genes. Using 2,821 paired whole-genome and RNA sequencing samples, we identified that misexpression events are enriched in cis for rare structural variants. We established putative mechanisms through which a subset of SVs lead to gene misexpression, including transcriptional readthrough, transcript fusions, and gene inversion. Overall, we develop misexpression as a type of transcriptomic outlier analysis and extend our understanding of the variety of mechanisms by which genetic variants can influence gene expression.
Same-sex sexual behavior has long interested genetics researchers in part because, while there is evidence of heritability, the trait as typically defined is associated with fewer offspring. Investigations of this phenomenon began in the 1990s with linkage studies and continue today with the advent of genome-wide association studies. As this body of research grows, so does critical scientific and ethical review of it. Here, we provide a targeted overview of existing genetics studies on same-sex sexual behavior, highlight the ethical and scientific considerations of this nascent field, and provide recommendations developed by the authors to enhance social and ethical responsibility.
To date, clinical genetic testing for Mendelian disease variants has focused heavily on exonic coding and intronic gene regions. This multi-step study was undertaken to provide an evidence base for selecting and applying computational approaches for use in clinical classification of 5' cisregulatory region variants. Curated datasets of clinically reported disease-causing 5' cisregulatory region variants and variants from matched genomic regions in population controls were used to calibrate six bioinformatic tools as predictors of variant pathogenicity. Likelihood ratio estimates were aligned to code weights following ClinGen recommendations for application of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) classification scheme. Considering code assignment across all reference dataset variants, performance was best for CADD (81.2%) and REMM (81.5%). Optimized thresholds provided moderate evidence toward pathogenicity (CADD, REMM) and moderate (CADD) or supporting (REMM) evidence against pathogenicity. Both sensitivity and specificity of prediction were improved when further categorizing variants based on location in an EPDnew-defined promoter region. Combining predictions (CADD, REMM, and location in a promoter region) increased specificity at the expense of sensitivity. Importantly, the optimal CADD thresholds for assigning ACMG/AMP codes PP3 (>= 10) and BP4 (<= 8) were vastly different from recommendations for protein-coding variants (PP3 >= 25.3; BP4 <= 22.7); CADD <22.7 would incorrectly assign BP4 for >90% of reported disease-causing cisregulatory region variants. Our results demonstrate the need to consider a tiered approach and tailored score thresholds to optimize bioinformatic impact prediction for clinical classification of 5' cisregulatory region variants.
Autosomal-dominant ataxia with sensory and autonomic neuropathy is a highly specific combined phenotype that we described in two Swedish kindreds in 2014; its genetic cause had remained unknown. Here, we report the discovery of exonic GGC trinucleotide repeat expan-sions, encoding poly-glycine, in zinc finger homeobox 3 (ZFHX3) in these families. The expansions were identified in whole-genome datasets within genomic segments that all affected family members shared. Non-expanded alleles carried one or more interruptions within the repeat. We also found ZFHX3 repeat expansions in three additional families, all from the region of Skane in southern Sweden. Individuals with expanded repeats developed balance and gait disturbances at 15 to 60 years of age and had sensory neuropathy and slow saccades. Anticipa-tion was observed in all families and correlated with different repeat lengths determined through long-read sequencing in two family mem-bers. The most severely affected individuals had marked autonomic dysfunction, with severe orthostatism as the most disabling clinical feature. Neuropathology revealed p62-positive intracytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions in neurons of the central and enteric nervous system, as well as alpha-synuclein positivity. ZFHX3 is located within the 16q22 locus, to which spinocerebellar ataxia type 4 (SCA4) repeat-edly had been mapped; the clinical phenotype in our families corresponded well with the unique phenotype described in SCA4, and the orig-inal SCA4 kindred originated from Sweden. ZFHX3 has known functions in neuronal development and differentiation n both the central and peripheral nervous system. Our findings demonstrate that SCA4 is caused by repeat expansions in ZFHX3.
Multi-ancestry genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have highlighted the existence of variants with ancestry-specific effect sizes. Understanding where and why these ancestry-specific effects occur is fundamental to understanding the genetic basis of human diseases and complex traits. Here, we characterized genes differentially expressed across ancestries (ancDE genes) at the cell-type level by leveraging single-cell RNA-sequencing data in peripheral blood mononuclear cells for 21 individuals with East Asian (EAS) ancestry and 23 individuals with European (EUR) ancestry (172,385 cells); then, we tested whether variants surrounding those genes were enriched in disease variants with ancestry-specific effect sizes by leveraging ancestry-matched GWASs of 31 diseases and complex traits (average n similar to 90,000 and similar to 267,000 in EAS and EUR, respectively). We observed that ancDE genes tended to be cell-type specific and enriched in genes interacting with the environment and in variants with ancestry-specific disease effect sizes, which suggests cell-type-specific, gene-by-environment interactions shared between regulatory and disease architectures. Finally, we illustrated how different environments might have led to ancestry-specific myeloid cell leukemia 1 (MCL1) expression in B cells and ancestry-specific allele effect sizes in lymphocyte count GWASs for variants surrounding MCL1. Our results imply that large single-cell and GWAS datasets from diverse ancestries are required to improve our understanding of human diseases.
Distinguishing genomic alterations in cancer -associated genes that have functional impact on tumor growth and disease progression from the ones that are passengers and confer no fitness advantage have important clinical implications. Evidence -based methods for nominating drivers are limited by existing knowledge on the oncogenic effects and therapeutic benefits of specific variants from clinical trials or experimental settings. As clinical sequencing becomes a mainstay of patient care, applying computational methods to mine the rapidly growing clinical genomic data holds promise in uncovering functional candidates beyond the existing knowledge base and expanding the patient population that could potentially benefit from genetically targeted therapies. We propose a statistical and computational method (MAGPIE) that builds on a likelihood approach leveraging the mutual exclusivity pattern within an oncogenic pathway for identifying probabilistically both the specific genes within a pathway and the individual mutations within such genes that are truly the drivers. Alterations in a cancer -associated gene are assumed to be a mixture of driver and passenger mutations with the passenger rates modeled in relationship to tumor mutational burden. We use simulations to study the operating characteristics of the method and assess false -positive and false -negative rates in driver nomination. When applied to a large study of primary melanomas, the method accurately identifies the known driver genes within the RTK-RAS pathway and nominates several rare variants as prime candidates for functional validation. A comprehensive evaluation of MAGPIE against existing tools has also been conducted leveraging the Cancer Genome Atlas data.
Advancements in genomic technologies have shown remarkable promise for improving health trajectories. The Human Genome Project has catalyzed the integration of genomic tools into clinical practice, such as disease risk assessment, prenatal testing and reproductive genomics, cancer diagnostics and prognostication, and therapeutic decision making. Despite the promise of genomic technologies, their full potential remains untapped without including individuals of diverse ancestries and integrating social determinants of health (SDOHs). The NHGRI launched the 2020 Strategic Vision with ten bold predictions by 2030, including "individuals from ancestrally diverse backgrounds will benefit equitably from advances in human genomics."Meeting this goal requires a holistic approach that brings together genomic advancements with careful consideration to healthcare access as well as SDOHs to ensure that translation of genetics research is inclusive, affordable, and accessible and ultimately narrows rather than widens health disparities. With this prediction in mind, this review delves into the two paramount applications of genetic testing-reproductive genomics and precision oncology. When discussing these applications of genomic advancements, we evaluate current accessibility limitations, highlight challenges in achieving representativeness, and propose paths forward to realize the ultimate goal of their equitable applications.
Despite the importance of gene-environment interactions (GxEs) in improving and operationalizing genetic discovery, interpretation of any GxEs that are discovered can be surprisingly difficult. There are many potential biological and statistical explanations for a statistically significant finding and, likewise, it is not always clear what can be claimed based on a null result. A better understanding of the possible underlying mechanisms leading to a detected GxE can help investigators decide which are and which are not relevant to their hypothesis. Here, we provide a detailed explanation of five "phenomena,"or data-generating mechanisms, that can lead to nonzero interaction estimates, as well as a discussion of specific instances in which they might be relevant. We hope that, given this framework, investigators can design more targeted experiments and provide cleaner interpretations of the associated results.
Precision medicine initiatives across the globe have led to a revolution of repositories linking large-scale genomic data with electronic health records, enabling genomic analyses across the entire phenome. Many of these initiatives focus solely on research insights, leading to limited direct benefit to patients. We describe the biobank at the Colorado Center for Personalized Medicine (CCPM Biobank) that was jointly developed by the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus and UCHealth to serve as a unique, dual-purpose research and clinical resource accelerating personalized medicine. This living resource currently has more than 200,000 participants with ongoing recruitment. We highlight the clinical, laboratory, regulatory, and HIPAA-compliant informatics infrastructure along with our stakeholder engagement, consent, recontact, and participant engagement strategies. We characterize aspects of genetic and geographic diversity unique to the Rocky Mountain region, the primary catchment area for CCPM Biobank participants. We leverage linked health and demographic information of the CCPM Biobank participant population to demonstrate the utility of the CCPM Biobank to replicate complex trait associations in the first 33,674 genotyped individuals across multiple disease domains. Finally, we describe our current efforts toward return of clinical genetic test results, including high -impact pathogenic variants and pharmacogenetic information, and our broader goals as the CCPM Biobank continues to grow. Bringing clinical and research interests together fosters unique clinical and translational questions that can be addressed from the large EHR-linked CCPM Biobank resource within a HIPAA- and CLIA-certified environment.
Regulation of transcription and translation are mechanisms through which genetic variants affect complex traits. Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) studies have been more successful at identifying cis- eQTL (within 1 Mb of the transcription start site) than transeQTL. Here, we tested the cis component of gene expression for association with observed plasma protein levels to identify cis- and transacting genes that regulate protein levels. We used transcriptome prediction models from 49 Genotype -Tissue Expression (GTEx) Project tissues to predict the cis component of gene expression and tested the predicted expression of every gene in every tissue for association with the observed abundance of 3,622 plasma proteins measured in 3,301 individuals from the INTERVAL study. We tested significant results for replication in 971 individuals from the Trans- omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) Multi -Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). We found 1,168 and 1,210 cis- and transacting associations that replicated in TOPMed (FDR < 0.05) with a median expected true positive rate ( p 1 ) across tissues of 0.806 and 0.390, respectively. The target proteins of transacting genes were enriched for transcription factor binding sites and autoimmune diseases in the GWAS catalog. Furthermore, we found a higher correlation between predicted expression and protein levels of the same underlying gene (R = 0.17) than observed expression (R = 0.10, p = 7.50 3 10 -11 ). This indicates the cis - acting genetically regulated (heritable) component of gene expression is more consistent across tissues than total observed expression (genetics + environment) and is useful in uncovering the function of SNPs associated with complex traits.
While it is widely thought that de novo mutations (DNMs) occur randomly, we previously showed that some DNMs are enriched because they are positively selected in the testes of aging men. These "selfish"mutations cause disorders with a shared presentation of features, including exclusive paternal origin, significant increase of the father's age, and high apparent germline mutation rate. To date, all known selfish mutations cluster within the components of the RTK-RAS-MAPK signaling pathway, a critical modulator of testicular homeostasis. Here, we demonstrate the selfish nature of the SMAD4 DNMs causing Myhre syndrome (MYHRS). By analyzing 16 informative trios, we show that MYHRS-causing DNMs originated on the paternally derived allele in all cases. We document a statistically significant epidemiological paternal age effect of 6.3 years excess for fathers of MYHRS probands. We developed an ultra-sensitive assay to quantify spontaneous MYHRS-causing SMAD4 variants in sperm and show that pathogenic variants at codon 500 are found at elevated level in sperm of most men and exhibit a strong positive correlation with donor's age, indicative of a high apparent germline mutation rate. Finally, we performed in vitro assays to validate the peculiar functional behavior of the clonally selected DNMs and explored the basis of the pathophysiology of the different SMAD4 sperm-enriched variants. Taken together, these data provide compelling evidence that SMAD4, , a gene operating outside the canonical RAS-MAPK signaling pathway, is associated with selfish spermatogonial selection and raises the possibility that other genes/pathways are under positive selection in the aging human testis.
Evolutionary changes in the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome could reflect its adaptation to host -induced selective pressure. Leveraging paired human exome and ultra -deep HBV genome-sequencing data from 567 affected individuals with chronic hepatitis B, we comprehensively searched for the signatures of this evolutionary process by conducting "genome-to-genome"association tests between all human genetic variants and viral mutations. We identified significant associations between an East Asian -specific missense variant in the gene encoding the HBV entry receptor NTCP (rs2296651, NTCP S267F) and mutations within the receptor -binding region of HBV preS1. Through in silico modeling and in vitro preS1-NTCP binding assays, we observed that the associated HBV mutations are in proximity to the NTCP variant when bound and together partially increase binding affinity to NTCP S267F. Furthermore, we identified significant associations between HLA-A variation and viral mutations in HLA-A-restricted T cell epitopes. We used in silico binding prediction tools to evaluate the impact of the associated HBV mutations on HLA presentation and observed that mutations that result in weaker binding affinities to their cognate HLA alleles were enriched. Overall, our results suggest the emergence of HBV escape mutations that might alter the interaction between HBV PreS1 and its cellular receptor NTCP during viral entry into hepatocytes and confirm the role of HLA class I restriction in inducing HBV epitope variations.
Numerous variants, including both single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in DNA and A>G RNA edits in mRNA as essential drivers of cellular proliferation and tumorigenesis, are commonly associated with cancer progression and growth. Thus, mining and summarizing single-cell variants will provide a refined and higher-resolution view of cancer and further contribute to precision medicine. Here, we established a database, CanCellVar, which aims to provide and visualize the comprehensive atlas of single-cell variants in tumor microenvironment. The current CanCellVar identified similar to 3 million variants (similar to 1.4 million SNVs and similar to 1.4 million A>G RNA edits) involved in 2,754,531 cells of 5 major cell types across 37 cancer types. CanCellVar provides the basic annotation information as well as cellular and molecular function properties of variants. In addition, the clinical relevance of variants can be obtained including tumor grade, treatment, metastasis, and others. Several flexible tools were also developed to aid retrieval and to analyze cell-cell interactions, gene expression, cell-development trajectories, regulation, and molecular structure affected by variants. Collectively, CanCellVar will serve as a valuable resource for investigating the functions and characteristics of single-cell variations and their roles in human tumor evolution and treatment.
Anoctamins are a family of Ca 2 & thorn;-activated proteins that may act as ion channels and/or phospholipid scramblases with limited understanding of function and disease association. Here, we identified five de novo and two inherited missense variants in ANO4 (alias TMEM16D ) as a cause of fever-sensitive developmental and epileptic or epileptic encephalopathy (DEE/EE) and generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS & thorn; ) or temporal lobe epilepsy. In silico modeling of the ANO4 structure predicted that all identified variants lead to destabilization of the ANO4 structure. Four variants are localized close to the Ca 2 & thorn; binding sites of ANO4, suggesting impaired protein function. Variant mapping to the protein topology suggests a preliminary genotype-phenotype correlation. Moreover, the observation of a heterozygous ANO4 deletion in a healthy individual suggests a dysfunctional protein as disease mechanism rather than haploinsufficiency. To test this hypothesis, we examined mutant ANO4 functional properties in a heterologous expression system by patchclamp recordings, immunocytochemistry, and surface expression of annexin A5 as a measure of phosphatidylserine scramblase activity. All ANO4 variants showed severe loss of ion channel function and DEE/EE associated variants presented mild loss of surface expression due to impaired plasma membrane trafficking. Increased levels of Ca 2 & thorn;-independent annexin A5 at the cell surface suggested an increased apoptosis rate in DEE-mutant expressing cells, but no changes in Ca 2 & thorn;-dependent scramblase activity were observed. Co-transfection with ANO4 wild-type suggested a dominant-negative effect. In summary, we expand the genetic base for both encephalopathic sporadic and inherited fever-sensitive epilepsies and link germline variants in ANO4 to a hereditary disease.
Both trio and population designs are popular study designs for identifying risk genetic variants in genome-wide association studies (GWASs). The trio design, as a family-based design, is robust to confounding due to population structure, whereas the population design is often more powerful due to larger sample sizes. Here, we propose KnockoffHybrid, a knockoff-based statistical method for hybrid analysis of both the trio and population designs. KnockoffHybrid provides a unified framework that brings together the advantages of both designs and produces powerful hybrid analysis while controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) in the presence of linkage disequilibrium and population structure. Furthermore, KnockoffHybrid has the flexibility to leverage different types of summary statistics for hybrid analyses, including expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and GWAS summary statistics. We demonstrate in simulations that KnockoffHybrid offers power gains over non-hybrid methods for the trio and population designs with the same number of cases while controlling the FDR with complex correlation among variants and population structure among subjects. In hybrid analyses of three trio cohorts for autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) from the Autism Speaks MSSNG, Autism Sequencing Consortium, and Autism Genome Project with GWAS summary statistics from the iPSYCH project and eQTL summary statistics from the MetaBrain project, KnockoffHybrid outperforms conventional methods by replicating several known risk genes for ASDs and identifying additional associations with variants in other genes, including the PRAME family genes involved in axon guidance and which may act as common targets for human speech/language evolution and related disorders.
The search for prognostic biomarkers capable of predicting patient outcomes, by analyzing gene expression in tissue samples and other molecular profiles, remains largely focused on single-gene-based or global-gene-search approaches. Gene-centric approaches, while foundational, fail to capture the higher-order dependencies that reflect the activities of co-regulated processes, pathway alterations, and regulatory networks, all of which are crucial in determining the patient outcomes in complex diseases like cancer. Here, we introduce GPS-Net, a computational framework that fills the gap in efficiently identifying prognostic modules by incorporating the holistic pathway structures and the network of gene interactions. By innovatively incorporating advanced multiple kernel learning techniques and network-based regularization, the proposed method not only enhances the accuracy of biomarker and pathway identification but also significantly reduces computational complexity, as demonstrated by extensive simulation studies. Applying GPS-Net, we identified key pathways that are predictive of patient outcomes in a cancer immunotherapy study. Overall, our approach provides a novel framework that renders genome-wide pathway-level prognostic analysis both feasible and scalable, synergizing both mechanism-driven and data-driven methodologies for precision genomics.
Pathogenic constitutional APC variants underlie familial adenomatous polyposis, the most common hereditary gastrointestinal polyposis syndrome. To improve variant classification and resolve the interpretative challenges of variants of uncertain significance (VUSs), APCspecific variant classification criteria were developed by the ClinGen-InSiGHT Hereditary Colorectal Cancer/Polyposis Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) based on the criteria of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP). A streamlined algorithm using the APCspecific criteria was developed and applied to assess all APC variants in ClinVar and the International Society for Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumours (InSiGHT) international reference APC Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD) variant database, which included a total of 10,228 unique APC variants. Among the ClinVar and LOVD variants with an initial classification of (likely) benign or (likely) pathogenic, 94% and 96% remained in their original categories, respectively. In contrast, 41% ClinVar and 61% LOVD VUSs were reclassified into clinically meaningful classes, the vast majority as (likely) benign. The total number of VUSs was reduced by 37%. In 24 out of 37(65%) promising APC variants that remained VUS despite evidence for pathogenicity, a data-mining-driven work-up allowed their reclassification as (likely) pathogenic. These results demonstrated that the application of APCspecific criteria substantially reduced the number of VUSs in ClinVar and LOVD. The study also demonstrated the feasibility of a systematic approach to variant classification in large datasets, which might serve as a generalizable model for other gene- or disease-specific variant interpretation initiatives. It also allowed for the prioritization of VUSs that will benefit from in-depth evidence collection. This subset of APC variants was approved by the VCEP and made publicly available through ClinVar and LOVD for widespread clinical use.
Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) is a crucial epigenetic modulator essential for various developmental and physiological functions. Although its dysfunction is increasingly recognized in abnormal phenotypes, to our knowledge, there have been no established reports of human diseases directly linked to HDAC3 dysfunction. Using trio exome sequencing and extensive phenotypic analysis, we correlated heterozygous de novo variants in HDAC3 with a neurodevelopmental disorder having variable clinical presentations, frequently associated with intellectual disability, developmental delay, epilepsy, and musculoskeletal abnormalities. In a cohort of six individuals, we identified missense variants in HDAC3 (c.277G>A [p.Asp93Asn], c.328G>A [p.Ala110Thr], c.601C>T [p.Pro201Ser], c. 797T>C [p.Leu266Ser], c.799G>A [p.Gly267Ser], and c.1075C>T [p.Arg359Cys]), all located in evolutionarily conserved sites and confirmed as de novo. . Experimental studies identified defective deacetylation activity in the p.Asp93Asn, p.Pro201Ser, p.Leu266Ser, and p.Gly267Ser variants, positioned near the enzymatic pocket. In addition, proteomic analysis employing co-immunoprecipitation revealed that the disrupted interactions with molecules involved in the CoREST and NCoR complexes, particularly in the p.Ala110Thr variant, consist of a central pathogenic mechanism. Moreover, immunofluorescence analysis showed diminished nuclear to cytoplasmic fluorescence ratio in the p.Ala110Thr, p.Gly267Ser, and p.Arg359Cys variants, indicating impaired nuclear localization. Taken together, our study highlights that de novo missense variants in HDAC3 are associated with a broad spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders, which emphasizes the complex role of HDAC3 in histone deacetylase activity, multi-protein complex interactions, and nuclear localization for proper physiological functions. These insights open new avenues for understanding the molecular mechanisms of HDAC3-related disorders and may inform future therapeutic strategies.
Disease -associated variants identified from genome-wide association studies (GWASs) frequently map to non -coding areas of the genome such as introns and intergenic regions. An exclusive reliance on gene -agnostic methods of genomic investigation could limit the identification of relevant genes associated with polygenic diseases such as Alzheimer disease (AD). To overcome such potential restriction, we developed a gene -constrained analytical method that considers only moderate- and high -risk variants that affect gene coding sequences. We report here the application of this approach to publicly available datasets containing 181,388 individuals without and with AD and the resulting identification of 660 genes potentially linked to the higher AD prevalence among Africans/African Americans. By integration with transcriptome analysis of 23 brain regions from 2,728 AD case -control samples, we concentrated on nine genes that potentially enhance the risk of AD: AACS, GNB5, GNS, HIPK3, MED13, SHC2, SLC22A5, VPS35, and ZNF398 . GNB5, the fifth member of the heterotrimeric G protein beta family encoding G B5, is primarily expressed in neurons and is essential for normal neuronal development in mouse brain. Homozygous or compound heterozygous loss of function of GNB5 in humans has previously been associated with a syndrome of developmental delay, cognitive impairment, and cardiac arrhythmia. In validation experiments, we confirmed that Gnb5 heterozygosity enhanced the formation of both amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brains of AD model mice. These results suggest that gene -constrained analysis can complement the power of GWASs in the identification of AD -associated genes and may be more broadly applicable to other polygenic diseases.
Normal tissues adjacent to the tumor (NATs) may harbor early breast carcinogenesis events driven by field cancerization. Although previous studies have characterized copy-number (CN) and transcriptomic alterations, the evolutionary history of NATs in breast cancer (BC) remains poorly characterized. Utilizing whole-genome sequencing (WGS), methylation profiling, and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), we analyzed paired germline, NATs, and tumor samples from 43 individuals with BC in Hong Kong (HK). We found that single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) were common in NATs, with one-third of NAT samples exhibiting SNVs in driver genes, many of which were present in paired tumor samples. The most frequently mutated genes in both tumor and NAT samples were PIK3CA, TP53, GATA3, and AKT1. In contrast, large-scale aberrations such as somatic CN alterations (SCNAs) and structural variants (SVs) were rarely detected in NAT samples. We generated phylogenetic trees to investigate the evolutionary history of paired NAT and tumor samples. They could be categorized into tumor only, shared, and multiple-tree groups, the last of which is concordant with non-genetic field cancerization. These groups exhibited distinct genomic and epigenomic characteristics in both NAT and tumor samples. Specifically, NAT samples in the shared-tree group showed higher number of mutations, while NAT samples belonging to the multiple-tree group showed a less inflammatory tumor microenvironment (TME), characterized by a higher proportion of regulatory T cells (Tregs) and lower presence of CD14 cell populations. In summary, our findings highlight the diverse evolutionary history in BC NAT/tumor pairs and the impact of field cancerization and TME in shaping the genomic evolutionary history of tumors.
Gene-based burden tests are a popular and powerful approach for analysis of exome-wide association studies. These approaches combine sets of variants within a gene into a single burden score that is then tested for association. Typically, a range of burden scores are calculated and tested across a range of annotation classes and frequency bins. Correlation between these tests can complicate the multiple testing correction and hamper interpretation of the results. We introduce a method called the sparse burden association test (SBAT) that tests the joint set of burden scores under the assumption that causal burden scores act in the same effect direction. The method simultaneously assesses the significance of the model fit and selects the set of burden scores that best explain the association at the same time. Using simulated data, we show that the method is well calibrated and highlight scenarios where the test outperforms existing gene-based tests. We apply the method to 73 quantitative traits from the UK Biobank, showing that SBAT is a valuable additional gene- based test when combined with other existing approaches. This test is implemented in the REGENIE software.
