The c.1222C>T (p.Arg408Trp) variant in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH) is the most frequent cause of phenylketonuria (PKU), the most common inborn error of metabolism. This autosomal-recessive disorder is characterized by accumulation of blood phenylalanine (Phe) to neurotoxic levels. Using real-world data, we observed that despite dietary and medical interventions, most PKU individuals harboring at least one c.1222C>T variant experience chronic, severe Phe elevations and do not comply with Phe monitoring guidelines. Motivated by these findings, we generated an edited c.1222C>T hepatocyte cell line and humanized c.1222C>T mouse models, with which we demonstrated efficient in vitro and in vivo correction of the variant with prime editing. Delivery via ad-eno-associated viral (AAV) vectors reproducibly achieved complete normalization of blood Phe levels in PKU mice, with up to 52% whole-liver corrective PAH editing. These studies validate a strategy involving prime editing as a potential treatment for a large proportion of individuals with PKU.
The heritability explained by local ancestry markers in an admixed population (h27) provides crucial insight into the genetic architecture of a complex disease or trait. Estimation of h27 can be susceptible to biases due to population structure in ancestral populations. Here, we present heritability estimation from admixture mapping summary statistics (HAMSTA), an approach that uses summary statistics from admixture mapping to infer heritability explained by local ancestry while adjusting for biases due to ancestral stratification. Through extensive simulations, we demonstrate that HAMSTA h27 estimates are approximately unbiased and are robust to ancestral stratification compared to existing approaches. In the presence of ancestral stratification, we show a HAMSTA-derived sampling scheme provides a calibrated family-wise error rate (FWER) of -5% for admixture mapping, unlike existing FWER estimation approaches. We apply HAMSTA to 20 quantitative phenotypes of up to 15,988 self-reported African American individuals in the Population Architecture 7 in the 20 phenotypes range from 0.0025 to 0.033 (mean hb2 using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study. We observe hb2 7 0.012 +/- 9.2 3 10-4), which translates to hb2 ranging from 0.062 to 0.85 (mean hb2 1/4 0.30 +/- 0.023). Across these phenotypes we find little evidence of inflation due to ancestral population stratification in current admixture mapping studies (mean inflation factor of 0.99 +/- 0.001). Overall, HAMSTA provides a fast and powerful approach to estimate genome-wide heritability and evaluate biases in test statistics of admixture mapping studies. 1/4
Over two dozen spliceosome proteins are involved in human diseases, also referred to as spliceosomopathies. WW domain-binding pro-tein 4 (WBP4) is part of the early spliceosomal complex and has not been previously associated with human pathologies in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database. Through GeneMatcher, we identified ten individuals from eight families with a severe neurodevelopmental syndrome featuring variable manifestations. Clinical manifestations included hypotonia, global developmental delay, severe intellectual disability, brain abnormalities, musculoskeletal, and gastrointestinal abnormalities. Genetic analysis revealed five different homozygous loss-of-function variants in WBP4. Immunoblotting on fibroblasts from two affected individuals with different genetic variants demonstrated a complete loss of protein, and RNA sequencing analysis uncovered shared abnormal splicing patterns, including in genes associated with abnormalities of the nervous system, potentially underlying the phenotypes of the pro -bands. We conclude that bi-allelic variants in WBP4 cause a developmental disorder with variable presentations, adding to the growing list of human spliceosomopathies.
In this perspective we discuss the current lack of genetic and environmental diversity in functional genomics datasets. There is a well described Eurocentric bias in genetic and functional genomic research that has a clear impact on the benefit this research can bring to underrepresented populations. Current research focused on genetic variant-to-function experiments aims to identify molecular QTLs, but the lack of data from genetically diverse individuals has limited analyses to mostly populations of European ancestry. Although some efforts have been established to increase diversity in functional genomic studies, much remains to be done to consistently generate data for underrepresented populations from now on. We discuss the major barriers for this continuity and suggest actionable insights, aiming to empower research and researchers from underserved populations.
As large-scale genomic screening becomes increasingly prevalent, understanding the influence of actionable results on healthcare utilization is key to estimating the potential long-term clinical impact. The eMERGE network sequenced individuals for actionable genes in multiple genetic conditions and returned results to individuals, providers, and the electronic health record. Differences in recommended health services (laboratory, imaging, and procedural testing) delivered within 12 months of return were compared among individuals with pathogenic or likely pathogenic (P/LP) findings to matched individuals with negative findings before and after return of results. Of 16,218 adults, 477 unselected individuals were found to have a monogenic risk for arrhythmia (n = 95), breast cancer (n = 96), cardiomyopathy (n = 95), colorectal cancer (n = 105), or familial hypercholesterolemia (n = 86). Individuals with P/LP results more frequently received services after return (43.8%) compared to before return (25.6%) of results and compared to individuals with negative findings (24.9%; p < 0.0001). The annual cost of qualifying healthcare services increased from an average of $162 before return to $343 after return of results among the P/LP group (p < 0.0001); differences in the negative group were non-significant. The mean difference in-differences was $149 (p < 0.0001), which describes the increased cost within the P/LP group corrected for cost changes in the negative group. When stratified by individual conditions, significant cost differences were observed for arrhythmia, breast cancer, and cardiomyopathy. In conclusion, less than half of individuals received billed health services after monogenic return, which modestly increased healthcare costs for payors in the year following return.
Understanding the genetic basis of complex phenotypes is a central pursuit of genetics. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) are a powerful way to find genetic loci associated with phenotypes. GWASs are widely and successfully used, but they face challenges related to the fact that variants are tested for association with a phenotype independently, whereas in reality variants at different sites are correlated because of their shared evolutionary history. One way to model this shared history is through the ancestral recombination graph (ARG), which encodes a series of local coalescent trees. Recent computational and methodological breakthroughs have made it feasible to estimate approximate ARGs from large-scale samples. Here, we explore the potential of an ARG-based approach to quantitative-trait locus (QTL) map-ping, echoing existing variance-components approaches. We propose a framework that relies on the conditional expectation of a local genetic relatedness matrix (local eGRM) given the ARG. Simulations show that our method is especially beneficial for finding QTLs in the presence of allelic heterogeneity. By framing QTL mapping in terms of the estimated ARG, we can also facilitate the detection of QTLs in understudied populations. We use local eGRM to analyze two chromosomes containing known body size loci in a sample of Native Hawaiians. Our inves-tigations can provide intuition about the benefits of using estimated ARGs in population-and statistical-genetic methods in general.
DNA sample contamination is a major issue in clinical and research applications of whole-genome and-exome sequencing. Even modest levels of contamination can substantially affect the overall quality of variant calls and lead to widespread genotyping errors. Currently, popular tools for estimating the contamination level use short-read data (BAM/CRAM files), which are expensive to store and manipulate and often not retained or shared widely. We propose a metric to estimate DNA sample contamination from variant-level whole-genome and-exome sequence data called CHARR, contamination from homozygous alternate reference reads, which leverages the infiltration of reference reads within homozygous alternate variant calls. CHARR uses a small proportion of variant-level genotype information and thus can be computed from single-sample gVCFs or callsets in VCF or BCF formats, as well as efficiently stored variant calls in Hail VariantDataset format. Our results demonstrate that CHARR accurately recapitulates results from existing tools with substantially reduced costs, improving the accuracy and efficiency of downstream analyses of ultra-large whole-genome and exome sequencing datasets.
Valosin-containing protein (VCP) is an AAA+ ATPase that plays critical roles in multiple ubiquitin-dependent cellular processes. Domi-nant pathogenic variants in VCP are associated with adult-onset multisystem proteinopathy (MSP), which manifests as myopathy, bone disease, dementia, and/or motor neuron disease. Through GeneMatcher, we identified 13 unrelated individuals who harbor heterozy-gous VCP variants (12 de novo and 1 inherited) associated with a childhood-onset disorder characterized by developmental delay, intel-lectual disability, hypotonia, and macrocephaly. Trio exome sequencing or a multigene panel identified nine missense variants, two in -frame deletions, one frameshift, and one splicing variant. We performed in vitro functional studies and in silico modeling to investigate the impact of these variants on protein function. In contrast to MSP variants, most missense variants had decreased ATPase activity, and one caused hyperactivation. Other variants were predicted to cause haploinsufficiency, suggesting a loss-of-function mechanism. This cohort expands the spectrum of VCP-related disease to include neurodevelopmental disease presenting in childhood.
Advances in long-read sequencing and assembly now mean that individual labs can generate phased genomes that are more accurate and more contiguous than the original human reference genome. With declining costs and increasing democratization of technology, we suggest that complete genome assemblies, where both parental haplotypes are phased telomere to telomere, will become standard in human genetics. Soon, even in clinical settings where rigorous sample-handling standards must be met, affected individuals could have reference-grade genomes fully sequenced and assembled in just a few hours given advances in technology, computational processing, and annotation. Complete genetic variant discovery will transform how we map, catalog, and associate variation with human disease and fundamentally change our understanding of the genetic diversity of all humans.
Misregulation of histone lysine methylation is associated with several human cancers and with human developmental disorders. DOT1L is an evolutionarily conserved gene encoding a lysine methyltransferase (KMT) that methylates histone 3 lysine-79 (H3K79) and was not previously associated with a Mendelian disease in OMIM. We have identified nine unrelated individuals with seven different de novo heterozygous missense variants in DOT1L through the Undiagnosed Disease Network (UDN), the SickKids Complex Care genomics proj-ect, and GeneMatcher. All probands had some degree of global developmental delay/intellectual disability, and most had one or more major congenital anomalies. To assess the pathogenicity of the DOT1L variants, functional studies were performed in Drosophila and human cells. The fruit fly DOT1L ortholog, grappa, is expressed in most cells including neurons in the central nervous system. The iden-tified DOT1L variants behave as gain-of-function alleles in flies and lead to increased H3K79 methylation levels in flies and human cells. Our results show that human DOT1L and fly grappa are required for proper development and that de novo heterozygous variants in DOT1L are associated with a Mendelian disease.
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a clinically variable and genetically heterogeneous cancer-predisposing disorder representing the most common bone marrow failure syndrome. It is caused by inactivating predominantly biallelic mutations involving >20 genes encoding proteins with roles in the FA/BRCA DNA repair pathway. Molecular diagnosis of FA is challenging due to the wide spectrum of the contributing gene mutations and structural rearrangements. The assessment of chromosomal fragility after exposure to DNA cross-linking agents is generally required to definitively confirm diagnosis. We assessed peripheral blood genome-wide DNA methylation (DNAm) profiles in 25 subjects with molecularly confirmed clinical diagnosis of FA (FANCA complementation group) using Illumina's Infinium EPIC array. We identified 82 differentially methylated CpG sites that allow to distinguish subjects with FA from healthy individuals and subjects with other genetic disorders, defining an FA-specific DNAm signature. The episignature was validated using a second cohort of subjects with FA involving different complementation groups, documenting broader genetic sensitivity and demonstrating its specificity using the EpiSign Knowledge Database. The episignature properly classified DNA samples obtained from bone marrow aspirates, demonstrating robustness. Using the selected probes, we trained a machine-learning model able to classify EPIC DNAm profiles in molecularly unsolved cases. Finally, we show that the generated episignature includes CpG sites that do not undergo functional selective pressure, allowing diagnosis of FA in individuals with reverted phenotype due to gene conversion. These findings provide a tool to accelerate diagnostic testing in FA and broaden the clinical utility of DNAm profiling in the diagnostic setting.
LDpred2 is a widely used Bayesian method for building polygenic scores (PGSs). LDpred2-auto can infer the two parameters from the LDpred model, the SNP heritability h2 and polygenicity p, so that it does not require an additional validation dataset to choose best -performing parameters. The main aim of this paper is to properly validate the use of LDpred2-auto for inferring multiple genetic parameters. Here, we present a new version of LDpred2-auto that adds an optional third parameter a to its model, for modeling negative selection. We then validate the inference of these three parameters (or two, when using the previous model). We also show that LDpred2-auto provides per-variant probabilities of being causal that are well calibrated and can therefore be used for fine-mapping purposes. We also introduce a formula to infer the out-of-sample predictive performance r2 of the resulting PGS directly from the Gibbs sampler of LDpred2-auto. Finally, we extend the set of HapMap3 variants recommended to use with LDpred2 with 37% more variants to improve the coverage of this set, and we show that this new set of variants captures 12% more heritability and provides 6% more predictive performance, on average, in UK Biobank analyses.
Hereditary spastic parapareses (HSPs) are clinically heterogeneous motor neuron diseases with variable age of onset and severity. Although variants in dozens of genes are implicated in HSPs, much of the genetic basis for pediatric-onset HSP remains unexplained. Here, we re-analyzed clinical exome-sequencing data from siblings with HSP of unknown genetic etiology and identified an inherited nonsense mutation (c.523C>T [p.Arg175Ter]) in the highly conserved RAB1A. The mutation is predicted to produce a truncated protein with an intact RAB GTPase domain but without two C-terminal cysteine residues required for proper subcellular protein localization. Additional RAB1A mutations, including two frameshift mutations and a mosaic missense mutation (c.83T>C [p.Leu28Pro]), were identified in three individuals with similar neurodevelopmental presentations. In rescue experiments, production of the full-length, but not the truncated, RAB1a rescued Golgi structure and cell proliferation in Rab1-depleted cells. In contrast, the missense-variant RAB1a disrupted Golgi structure despite intact Rab1 expression, suggesting a dominant-negative function of the mosaic missense mutation. Knock-down of RAB1A in cultured human embryonic stem cell-derived neurons resulted in impaired neuronal arborization. Finally, RAB1A is located within the 2p14-p15 microdeletion syndrome locus. The similar clinical presentations of individuals with RAB1A loss-of-function mutations and the 2p14-p15 microdeletion syndrome implicate loss of RAB1A in the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental manifestations of this microdeletion syndrome. Our study identifies a RAB1A-related neurocognitive disorder with speech and motor delay, demonstrates an essential role for RAB1a in neuronal differentiation, and implicates RAB1A in the etiology of the neurodevelopmental sequelae associated with the 2p14-p15 microdeletion syndrome.
Detection of aberrantly spliced genes is an important step in RNA-seq-based rare-disease diagnostics. We recently developed FRASER, a denoising autoencoder-based method that outperformed alternative methods of detecting aberrant splicing. However, because FRASER's three splice metrics are partially redundant and tend to be sensitive to sequencing depth, we introduce here a more robust intron-excision metric, the intron Jaccard index, that combines the alternative donor, alternative acceptor, and intron-retention signal into a single value. Moreover, we optimized model parameters and filter cutoffs by using candidate rare-splice-disrupting variants as independent evidence. On 16,213 GTEx samples, our improved algorithm, FRASER 2.0, called typically 10 times fewer splicing outliers while increasing the proportion of candidate rare-splice-disrupting variants by 10-fold and substantially decreasing the effect of sequencing depth on the number of reported outliers. To lower the multiple-testing correction burden, we introduce an option to select the genes to be tested for each sample instead of a transcriptome-wide approach. This option can be particularly useful when prior information, such as candidate variants or genes, is available. Application on 303 rare-disease samples confirmed the relative reduction in the number of outlier calls for a slight loss of sensitivity; FRASER 2.0 recovered 22 out of 26 previously identified pathogenic splicing cases with default cutoffs and 24 when multiple-testing correction was limited to OMIM genes containing rare variants. Altogether, these methodological improvements contribute to more effective RNA-seq-based rare diagnostics by drastically reducing the amount of splicing outlier calls per sample at minimal loss of sensitivity.
We examined more than 97,000 families from four neurodevelopmental disease cohorts and the UK Biobank to identify phenotypic and genetic patterns in parents contributing to neurodevelopmental disease risk in children. We identified within- and cross-disorder correlations between six phenotypes in parents and children, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder (R = 0.32-0.38, p < 10(-126)). We also found that measures of sub-clinical autism features in parents are associated with several autism severity measures in children, including biparental mean Social Responsiveness Scale scores and proband Repetitive Behaviors Scale scores (regression coefficient = 0.14, p = 3.38 x 10(-4)). We further describe patterns of phenotypic similarity between spouses, where spouses show correlations for six neurological and psychiatric phenotypes, including a within-disorder correlation for depression (R = 0.24-0.68, p < 0.001) and a cross-disorder correlation between anxiety and bipolar disorder (R = 0.09-0.22, p < 10(-92)). Using a simulated population, we also found that assortative mating can lead to increases in disease liability over generations and the appearance of "genetic anticipation" in families carrying rare variants. We identified several families in a neurodevelopmental disease cohort where the proband inherited multiple rare variants in disease-associated genes from each of their affected parents. We further identified parental relatedness as a risk factor for neurodevelopmental disorders through its inverse relationship with variant pathogenicity and propose that parental relatedness modulates disease risk by increasing genome-wide homozygosity in children (R = 0.05-0.26, p < 0.05). Our results highlight the utility of assessing parent phenotypes and genotypes toward predicting features in children who carry rare variably expressive variants and implicate assortative mating as a risk factor for increased disease severity in these families.
Digital solutions are needed to support rapid increases in the application of genetic/genomic tests (GTs) in diverse clinical settings and patient populations. We developed GUIA, a bilingual digital application that facilitates disclosure of GT results. The NYCKidSeq randomized controlled trial enrolled diverse children with neurologic, cardiac, and immunologic conditions who underwent GTs. The trial evaluated GUIA's impact on understanding the GT results by randomizing families to results disclosure genetic counseling with GUIA (intervention) or standard of care (SOC). Parents/legal guardians (participants) completed surveys at baseline, post-results disclosure, and 6 months later. Survey measures assessed the primary study outcomes of participants' perceived understanding of and confidence in explaining their child's GT results and the secondary outcome of objective understanding. The analysis included 551 diverse participants, 270 in the GUIA arm and 281 in SOC. Participants in the GUIA arm had significantly higher perceived understanding post-results (OR = 2.8, CI[1.004, 7.617], p = 0.049) and maintained higher objective understanding over time (OR = 1.1, CI[1.004, 1.127], p = 0.038) compared to SOC. There was no impact on perceived confidence. Hispanic/Latino(a) individuals in the GUIA arm maintained higher perceived understanding (OR = 3.9, CI[1.603, 9.254], p = 0.003), confidence (OR = 2.7, CI[1.021, 7.277], p = 0.046), and objective understanding (OR = 1.1, CI[1.009, 1.212], p = 0.032) compared to SOC. This trial demonstrates that GUIA positively impacts understanding of GT results in diverse parents of children with suspected genetic conditions and builds a case for utilizing GUIA to deliver complex results. Continued development and evaluation of digital applications in diverse populations are critical for equitably scaling GT offerings in specialty clinics.
Aneuploidy frequently arises during human meiosis and is the primary cause of early miscarriage and in vitro fertilization (IVF) failure. Individuals undergoing IVF exhibit significant variability in aneuploidy rates, although the exact genetic causes of the variability in aneuploid egg production remain unclear. Preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A) using next-generation sequencing is a standard test for identifying and selecting IVF-derived euploid embryos. The wealth of embryo aneuploidy data and ultra-low coverage whole-genome sequencing (ulc-WGS) data from PGT-A have the potential to discover variants in parental genomes that are associated with aneuploidy risk in their embryos. Using ulc-WGS data from 10,000 PGT-A biopsies, we imputed genotype likelihoods of genetic variants in embryo genomes. We then used the imputed variants and embryo aneuploidy calls to perform a genome-wide association study of aneuploidy incidence. Finally, we carried out functional evaluation of the identified candidate gene in a mouse oocyte system. We identified one locus on chromosome 3 that is significantly associated with meiotic aneuploidy risk. One candidate gene, CCDC66, encompassed by this locus, is involved in chromosome segregation during meiosis. Using mouse oocytes, we showed that CCDC66 regulates meiotic progression and chromosome segregation fidelity, especially in older mice. Our work extended the research utility of PGT-A ulc-WGS data by allowing robust association testing and improved the understanding of the genetic contribution to maternal meiotic aneuploidy risk. Importantly, we introduce a generalizable method that has potential to be leveraged for similar association studies that use ulc-WGS data.
Epistasis is central in many domains of biology, but it has not yet been proven useful for understanding the etiology of complex traits. This is partly because complex-trait epistasis involves polygenic interactions that are poorly captured in current models. To address this gap, we developed a model called Epistasis Factor Analysis (EFA). EFA assumes that polygenic epistasis can be factorized into interactions between a few epistasis factors (EFs), which represent latent polygenic components of the observed complex trait. The statistical goals of EFA are to improve polygenic prediction and to increase power to detect epistasis, while the biological goal is to unravel genetic effects into more -ho-mogeneous units. We mathematically characterize EFA and use simulations to show that EFA outperforms current epistasis models when its assumptions approximately hold. Applied to predicting yeast growth rates, EFA outperforms the additive model for several traits with large epistasis heritability and uniformly outperforms the standard epistasis model. We replicate these prediction improvements in a second data -set. We then apply EFA to four previously characterized traits in the UK Biobank and find statistically significant epistasis in all four, including two that are robust to scale transformation. Moreover, we find that the inferred EFs partly recover pre-defined biological pathways for two of the traits. Our results demonstrate that more realistic models can identify biologically and statistically meaningful epistasis in complex traits, indicating that epistasis has potential for precision medicine and characterizing the biology underlying GWAS results.
Admixed individuals offer unique opportunities for addressing limited transferability in polygenic scores (PGSs), given the substantial trans-ancestry genetic correlation in many complex traits. However, they are rarely considered in PGS training, given the challenges in representing ancestry-matched linkage-disequilibrium reference panels for admixed individuals. Here we present inclusive PGS (iPGS), which captures ancestry-shared genetic effects by finding the exact solution for penalized regression on individual-level data and is thus naturally applicable to admixed individuals. We validate our approach in a simulation study across 33 configurations with varying heritability, polygenicity, and ancestry composition in the training set. When iPGS is applied ton = 237,055 ancestry-diverse individuals in the UK Biobank, it shows the greatest improvements in Africans by 48.9% on average across 60 quantitative traits and up to 50-fold improvements for some traits (neutrophil count, R2 = 0.058) over the baseline model trained on the same number of European individuals. When we allowed iPGS to use n = 284,661 individuals, we observed an average improvement of 60.8% for African, 11.6% for South Asian, 7.3% for non-British White, 4.8% for White British, and 17.8% for the other individuals. We further developed iPGS+refit to jointly model the ancestry-shared and-dependent genetic effects when heterogeneous genetic associations were present. For neutrophil count, for example, iPGS+refit showed the highest predictive performance in the African group (R2 = 0.115), which exceeds the best predictive performance for the White British group (R2 = 0.090 in the iPGS model), even though only 1.49% of individuals used in the iPGS training are of African ancestry. Our results indicate the power of including diverse individuals for developing more equitable PGS models.
Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) hold promise for disease risk assessment and prevention. The Genomic Medicine at Veterans Affairs (GenoVA) Study is addressing three main challenges to the clinical implementation of PRSs in preventive care: defining and determining their clinical utility, implementing them in time-constrained primary care settings, and countering their potential to exacerbate health-care disparities. The study processes used to test patients, report their PRS results to them and their primary care providers (PCPs), and promote the use of those results in clinical decision-making are modeled on common practices in primary care. The following diseases were chosen for their prevalence and familiarity to PCPs: coronary artery disease; type 2 diabetes; atrial fibrillation; and breast, colorectal, and prostate cancers. A randomized clinical trial (RCT) design and primary outcome of time-to-new-diagnosis of a target disease bring methodological rigor to the question of the clinical utility of PRS implementation. The study's pragmatic RCT design enhances its relevance to how PRS might reasonably be implemented in primary care. Steps the study has taken to promote health equity include the thoughtful handling of genetic ancestry in PRS construction and reporting and enhanced recruitment strategies to address underrepresentation in research participation. To date, enhanced recruitment efforts have been both necessary and successful: participants of underrepresented race and ethnicity groups have been less likely to enroll in the study than expected but ultimately achieved proportional representation through targeted efforts. The GenoVA Study experience to date offers insights for evaluating the clinical utility of equitable PRS implementation in adult primary care.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) across thousands of traits have revealed the pervasive pleiotropy of trait-associated genetic variants. While methods have been proposed to characterize pleiotropic components across groups of phenotypes, scaling these approaches to ultra-large-scale biobanks has been challenging. Here, we propose FactorGo, a scalable variational factor analysis model to identify and characterize pleiotropic components using biobank GWAS summary data. In extensive simulations, we observe that FactorGo outperforms the state-of-the-art (model-free) approach tSVD in capturing latent pleiotropic factors across phenotypes while maintaining a similar computational cost. We apply FactorGo to estimate 100 latent pleiotropic factors from GWAS summary data of 2,483 phenotypes measured in European-ancestry Pan-UK BioBank individuals (N 1/4 420,531). Next, we find that factors from FactorGo are more enriched with relevant tissue-specific annotations than those identified by tSVD (p 1/4 2.58E-10) and validate our approach by recapitulating brain-specific enrichment for BMI and the height-related connection between reproductive system and muscular-skeletal growth. Finally, our analyses suggest shared etiologies between rheumatoid arthritis and periodontal condition in addition to alkaline phosphatase as a candidate prognostic biomarker for prostate cancer. Overall, FactorGo improves our biological understanding of shared etiologies across thousands of GWASs.
