Rice (Oryza sativa) is a staple food crop globally, with origins in wild progenitors within the AA genome group of Oryza species. Oryza rufipogon and Oryza meridionalis are native to tropical Asia and Northern Australia and offer unique genetic reservoirs. Here we explored the relationships of the genomes of these wild rice species with the domesticated rice genome. We utilized long read sequencing (PacBio HiFi) and chromatin mapping (Hi-C) to produce de novo chromosomal level genomes of Oryza meridionalis, the most divergent AA gnome species, and the unique Australian Oryza rufipogon like taxon that is a sister to the clade of domesticated and wild AA genome rice species of Asia and Africa. Comparative genomic analyses were conducted to identify structural variations and syntenic relationships between these wild taxa and the domesticated rice variety Nipponbare. The genome assemblies of the wild rice species achieved high completeness and contiguity, revealing the shared and unique genes in each species. Both wild species uniquely shared some genes with domesticated rice many of which were associated with disease resistance and stress tolerance. Structural differences included the large 6 Mb inversion on chromosome 6 specific to Japonica rice. Functional annotation highlighted conserved biological functions and novel genes unique to the wild taxa. These findings provide a deeper understanding of rice domestication and highlight the genetic contributions of wild species to enhancing the genetic diversity and ecological adaptability of modern rice varieties. Our study emphasizes the importance of conserving wild rice populations as genetic resources for breeding and adaptation in changing environments.
Age-related muscle wasting, sarcopenia is an extensive loss of muscle mass and strength with age and a major cause of disability and accidents in the elderly. Mechanisms purported to be involved in muscle ageing and sarcopenia are numerous but poorly understood, necessitating deeper study. Hence, we employed high-throughput RNA sequencing to survey the global changes in protein-coding gene expression occurring in skeletal muscle with age. Caloric restriction (CR) is a known prophylactic intervention against sarcopenia. Therefore, total RNA was isolated from the muscle tissue of both rats fed ad libitum and CR rats. RNA-seq data were subjected to Gene Ontology, pathway, co-expression, and interaction network analyses. This revealed the functional pathways most activated by both ageing and CR, as well as the key "hub" proteins involved in their activation.RNA-seq revealed 442 protein-coding genes to be upregulated and 377 to be downregulated in aged muscle, compared to young muscle. Upregulated genes were commonly involved in protein folding and immune responses; meanwhile, downregulated genes were often related to developmental biology. CR was found to suppress 69.7% and rescue 57.8% of the genes found to be upregulated and downregulated in aged muscle, respectively. In addition, CR uniquely upregulated 291 and downregulated 304 protein-coding genes. Hub genes implicated in both ageing and CR included Gc, Plg, Irf7, Ifit3, Usp18, Rsad2, Blm and RT1-A2, whilst those exclusively implicated in CR responses included Alb, Apoa1, Ambp, F2, Apoh, Orm1, Mx1, Oasl2 and Rtp4. Hub genes involved in ageing but unaffected by CR included Fgg, Fga, Fgb and Serpinc1. In conclusion, this comprehensive RNA sequencing study highlights gene expression patterns, hub genes and signalling pathways most affected by ageing in skeletal muscle. This data may provide the initial evidence for several targets for potential future therapeutic interventions against sarcopenia.
BackgroundPlant senescence is the process of physiological maturation of plants and is important for crop yield and quality. Senescence is controlled by several factors, such as temperature and photoperiod. However, the molecular basis by which these genes promote senescence in soybeans is not well understood. We identified senescence-related genes via transcriptome analysis of early-senescence (ES)- and late-senescence (LS)-type plants to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of senescence in soybeans.ResultsWe obtained early-senescence (ES)- and late-senescence (LS)-type F7 plants from a cross between a hybrid (Glycine max x Glycine soja) and the Glycine max cultivar. The ES-type plants presented the reproductive (R2) growth stage at 50 days after sowing (DAS) and the R7 growth stage at 95 DAS, whereas the LS-type plants presented the beginning of the R1 and R6 growth stages at 50 and 95 DAS, respectively. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying this senescence, we performed transcriptome analysis of leaves from 50 to 95 DAS of ES- and LS-type plants. A total of 2,414 and 2,471 genes at 50 and 95 DAS, respectively, were differentially expressed between ES-type and LS-type plants. Twenty-three candidate genes associated with the circadian clock, chlorophyll biosynthesis, phytohormones, and senescence-associated protein kinases were identified, and their expression levels were analyzed. In addition, to understand interaction between circadian clock and senescence, we analyzed expression patterns of seven circadian clock-related genes during the time period (light and dark condition): CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1), LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), CONSTANS-LIKE 9 (COL9), LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX) EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3), PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR5 (PRR5) and GIGANTEA (GI). The expression patterns of circadian clock-related genes were similar in the ES- and LS-type plants. However, the transcription levels of these genes were compared between ES- and LS-type plants, and the expression of these genes was greater than that in LS-type plants during the period when expression increased. Therefore, each set of candidate genes regulated senescence in each plant by regulating their expression level.ConclusionsThese findings provide novel insights into the regulation of senescence in soybean plants, which could lead to the development of new strategies to improve agriculture.
BackgroundHexaploid oat (Avena sativa L.) is a commercially important cereal crop due to its soluble dietary fiber beta-glucan, a hemicellulose known to prevent cardio-vascular diseases. To maximize health benefits associated with the consumption of oat-based food products, breeding efforts have aimed at increasing the beta-glucan content in oat groats. However, progress has been limited. To accelerate oat breeding efforts, we leveraged existing breeding datasets (1,230 breeding lines from South Dakota State University oat breeding program grown in multiple environments between 2015 and 2022) to conduct a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to increase our understanding of the genetic control of beta-glucan content in oats and to compare strategies to implement genomic selection (GS) to increase genetic gain for beta-glucan content in oat.ResultsLarge variation for beta-glucan content was observed with values ranging between 3.02 and 7.24%. An independent GWAS was performed for each breeding panel in each environment and identified 22 loci distributed over fourteen oat chromosomes significantly associated with beta-glucan content. Comparison based on physical position showed that 12 out of 22 loci coincided with previously identified beta-glucan QTLs, and three loci are in the vicinity of cellulose synthesis genes, Cellulose synthase-like (Csl). To perform a GWAS analysis across all breeding datasets, the beta-glucan content of each breeding line was predicted for each of the 26 environments. The overall GWAS identified 73 loci, of which 15 coincided with loci identified for individual environments and 37 coincided with previously reported beta-glucan QTLs not identified when performing the GWAS in single years. In addition, 21 novel loci were identified that were not reported in the previous studies. The proposed approach increased our ability to detect significantly associated markers. The comparison of multiple GS scenarios indicated that using a specific set of markers as a fixed effect in GS models did not increase the prediction accuracy. However, the use of multi-environment data in the training population resulted in an increase in prediction accuracy (0.61-0.72) as compared to single-year (0.28-0.48) data. The use of USDA-SoyWheOatBar-3 K genotyping array data resulted in a similar level of prediction accuracy as did genotyping-by-sequencing data.ConclusionThis study identified and confirmed the location of multiple loci associated with beta-glucan content. The proposed genomic strategies significantly increase both our ability to detect significant markers in GWAS and the accuracy of genomic predictions. The findings of this study can be useful to accelerate the genetic improvement of beta-glucan content and other traits.
The influx of whole genome sequencing (WGS) data in the public health and clinical diagnostic sectors has created a need for data analysis methods and bioinformatics expertise, which can be a bottleneck for many laboratories. At Sciensano, the Belgian national public health institute, an intuitive and user-friendly bioinformatics tool portal was implemented using Galaxy, an open-source platform for data analysis and workflow creation. The Galaxy @Sciensano instance is available to both internal and external scientists and offers a wide range of tools provided by the community, complemented by over 50 custom tools and pipelines developed in-house. The tool selection is currently focused primarily on the analysis of WGS data generated using Illumina sequencing for microbial pathogen typing, characterization and outbreak detection, but it also addresses specific use cases for other data types. Our Galaxy instance includes several custom-developed 'push-button' pipelines, which are user-friendly and intuitive stand-alone tools that perform complete characterization of bacterial isolates based on WGS data and generate interactive HTML output reports with key findings. These pipelines include quality control, de novo assembly, sequence typing, antimicrobial resistance prediction and several relevant species-specific assays. They are tailored for pathogens with active genomic surveillance programs, and clinical relevance, such as Escherichia coli, Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella spp. and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. These tools and pipelines utilize internationally recognized databases such as PubMLST, EnteroBase, and the NCBI National Database of Antibiotic Resistant Organisms, which are automatically synchronized on a regular basis to ensure up-to-date results. Many of these pipelines are part of the routine activities of Belgian national reference centers and laboratories, some of which use them under ISO accreditation. This resource is publicly available for noncommercial use at https://galaxy.sciensano.be/ and can help other laboratories establish reliable, traceable and reproducible bioinformatics analyses for pathogens encountered in public health settings.
Leaf is the main photosynthetic organ at the seedling stage of rapeseed and leaf size is a crucial agronomic trait affecting rapeseed yield. Understanding the genetic mechanisms underlying leaf size is therefore important for rapeseed breeding. In this study, QTL mapping for three traits related to leaf size, i.e., leaf width (LW), leaf length (LL) and leaf area (LA), was performed using a recombinant inbred line (RIL) population and four QTLs for LW, two QTLs for LL and four QTLs for LA were detected. Transcriptome analysis revealed that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were enriched in the GO terms related to microtubules, and the expression level of several genes involved in cell division also showed significant differences. Microscopic analysis suggested that the cell number was the main factor regulating leaf size. Combining QTL mapping and RNA sequencing, four promising candidate genes, including BnaA10G0085600ZS, BnaA10G0156900ZS, BnaC03G0441700ZS, and BnaC08G0410600ZS, were proposed to control leaf size by regulating cell division. The results of QTL, transcriptome analysis, and anatomical observation were highly consistent, collectively revealing that genes related to cell division played a crucial role in regulating the leaf size traits in rapeseed. These findings provided further insights into the genetic mechanism of leaf size and built fundamental theory basis for high-density tolerance breeding in rapeseed.
BackgroundHaplotype networks are useful for investigating the genealogical relationships among haplotypes and have been extensively used in molecular evolution and population genetic studies. However, existing tools for visualizing haplotype networks lack comprehensive functionalities for data exploration and layout adjustments. Therefore, there is a need for a useful tool capable of constructing and visualizing haplotype networks, facilitating the exploration of data, particularly with datasets with large sample sizes.ResultsWe present HapNetworkView, a user-friendly tool that facilitates the construction and interactive visualization of haplotype networks, enabling users to explore haplotypes and mutation information effectively. HapNetworkView offers both automatic optimization and manual adjustment for haplotype network layouts. Additionally, HapNetworkView supports various input and output formats, as well as color customization.ConclusionsThese comprehensive functionalities collectively satisfy various needs of users in haplotype network analysis, making HapNetworkView a valuable tool.
BackgroundChemosensory perception plays a vital role in insect survival and adaptability, driving essential behaviours such as navigation, mate identification, and food location. This sensory process is governed by diverse gene families, including odorant-binding proteins (OBPs), olfactory receptors (ORs), ionotropic receptors (IRs), chemosensory proteins (CSPs), gustatory receptors (GRs), and sensory neuron membrane proteins (SNMPs). The oriental mole cricket (Gryllotalpa orientalis Burmeister), an invasive pest with an underground, phyllophagous lifestyle, causes substantial crop damage. This study characterizes the chemosensory gene repertoire of G. orientalis based on de novo genome assembly and transcriptomic analysis.ResultsWe present a draft genome of G. orientalis at the scaffold level, spanning 2.94 Gb and comprising 10,497 scaffolds. This assembly encodes 19,155 protein-coding genes, including 158 chemosensory genes: 30 odorant receptors (ORs), 64 ionotropic receptors (IRs), ten gustatory receptors (GRs), 28 odorant-binding proteins (OBPs), 25 chemosensory proteins (CSPs), and a single sensory neuron membrane protein (SNMP). Expression analysis indicated that 71 chemosensory genes were actively expressed in the head, thorax, and legs, with ORs and OBPs showing higher expression in the head and legs. In contrast, GRs and IRs were predominantly expressed in the head.ConclusionsThis study provides the first comprehensive identification of chemosensory gene families in the G. orientalis genome, characterized as a scaffold-level draft genome. These findings provide a basis for future functional studies and highlight the role of chemoreception in the subterranean environment.
BackgroundThe profitability of the beef industry is directly influenced by the fertility rate and reproductive performance of both males and females, which can be improved through selective breeding. When performing genomic analyses, genetic markers located on the X chromosome have been commonly ignored despite the X chromosome being one of the largest chromosomes in the cattle genome. Therefore, the primary objectives of this study were to: (1) estimate variance components and genetic parameters for eighteen male and five female fertility and reproductive traits in Nellore cattle including X chromosome markers in the analyses; and (2) perform genome-wide association studies and functional genomic analyses to better understand the genetic background of male and female fertility and reproductive performance traits in Nellore cattle.ResultsThe percentage of the total direct heritability (h2total) explained by the X chromosome markers (h2x) ranged from 3 to 32% (average: 16.4%) and from 9 to 67% (average: 25.61%) for female reproductive performance and male fertility traits, respectively. Among the traits related to breeding soundness evaluation, the overall bull and semen evaluation and semen quality traits accounted for the highest proportion of h2x relative to h2total with an average of 39.5% and 38.75%, respectively. The total number of significant genomic markers per trait ranged from 7 (seminal vesicle width) to 43 (total major defects). The number of significant markers located on the X chromosome ranged from zero to five. A total of 683, 252, 694, 382, 61, and 77 genes overlapped with the genomic regions identified for traits related to female reproductive performance, semen quality, semen morphology, semen defects, overall bulls' fertility evaluation, and overall semen evaluation traits, respectively. The key candidate genes located on the X chromosome are PRR32, STK26, TMSB4X, TLR7, PRPS2, SMS, SMARCA1, UTP14A, and BCORL1. The main gene ontology terms identified are "Oocyte Meiosis", "Progesterone Mediated Oocyte Maturation", "Thermogenesis", "Sperm Flagellum", and "Innate Immune Response".ConclusionsOur findings indicate the key role of genes located on the X chromosome on the phenotypic variability of male and female reproduction and fertility traits in Nellore cattle. Breeding programs aiming to improve these traits should consider adding the information from X chromosome markers in their genomic analyses.
BackgroundThe resurgence of Anopheles funestus, a dominant vector of human malaria in western Kenya was partly attributed to insecticide resistance. However, evidence on the molecular basis of pyrethroid resistance in western Kenya is limited. Here, we reported metabolic resistance mechanisms and demonstrated that multiple non-coding Ribonucleic Acids (ncRNAs) could play a potential role in An. funestus resistance to pyrethroid in western Kenya. Anopheles funestus mosquitoes were sampled using aspiration methods in Bungoma, Teso, Siaya, Port Victoria and Kombewa in western Kenya. The F1 progenies were exposed to deltamethrin (0.05%), permethrin (0.75%), DDT (4%) and pirimiphos-methyl (0.25%) following WHO test guidelines. A synergist assay using piperonyl butoxide (PBO) (4%) was conducted to determine cytochrome P450s' role in pyrethroid resistance. RNA-seq was conducted on a combined pool of specimens that were resistant and unexposed, and the results were compared with those of the FANG susceptible reference strain. This approach aimed to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlying the observed phenotypic pyrethroid resistance. ResultsPyrethroid resistance was observed in all sites with an average mortality rate (MR) of 57.6%. Port Victoria had the highest level of pyrethroid resistance to permethrin (MR = 53%) and deltamethrin (MR = 11%. Teso had the lowest level of resistance to permethrin (MR = 70%) and deltamethrin (MR = 87%). Resistance to DDT was observed only in Kombewa (MR = 89%) and Port Victoria (MR = 85%). A full susceptibility to P-methyl (0.25%) was observed in all sites. PBO synergist assay revealed high susceptibility (> 98%) to pyrethroids in all the sites except for Port Victoria (MR = 96%). Whole transcriptomic analysis showed that most gene families associated with pyrethroid resistance comprised non-coding RNAs (67%), followed by immunity proteins (10%), cytochrome P450s (6%), cuticular proteins (5%), olfactory proteins (4%), glutathione S-transferases (3%), UDP-glycosyltransferases (2%), ATP-binding cassettes (2%) and carboxylesterases (1%). ConclusionThis study unveils the molecular basis of insecticide resistance in An. funestus in western Kenya, highlighting for the first time the potential role of non-coding RNAs alongside metabolic detoxification in pyrethroid resistance. Targeting non-coding RNAs for intervention development could help in insecticide resistance management.
BackgroundMicrosatellites are highly polymorphic repeat sequences ubiquitously interspersed throughout almost all genomes which are widely used as powerful molecular markers in diverse fields. Microsatellite expansions play pivotal roles in gene expression regulation and are implicated in various neurological diseases and cancers. Although much effort has been devoted to developing efficient tools for microsatellite identification, there is still a lack of a powerful tool for large-scale microsatellite analysis.ResultsWe present Krait2, a user-friendly graphical tool for investigating perfect, imperfect and compound microsatellites from FASTA and FASTQ formatted genomic datasets. Krait2 not only provides features such as primer design, repeat filtering, repeat annotation and statistical analysis, but also offers various output formats to support customized downstream analysis. Moreover, it has capability of analyzing multiple genomes simultaneously and conducting comparative analysis.ConclusionsKrait2 is a versatile and easy-to-use software for both novices and experts to identify and analyze microsatellites. The installer and source code are available at https://github.com/lmdu/krait2.
BackgroundThe evolution and development of flowers are biologically essential and of broad interest. Maize and sorghum have similar morphologies and phylogeny while harboring different inflorescence architecture. The difference in flower architecture between these two species is likely due to spatiotemporal gene expression regulation, and they are a good model for researching the evolution of flower development.ResultsIn this study, we generated single nucleus and spatial RNA-seq data for maize ear, tassel, and sorghum inflorescence. By combining single nucleus and spatial transcriptome, we can track the spatial expression of single nucleus cluster marker genes and map single nucleus clusters to spatial positions. This ability provides great power to annotate the single nucleus clusters. Combining the cell cluster resolved transcriptome comparison with genome alignment, our analysis suggested that maize ear and tassel inflorescence diversity is associated with the maize-specific whole genome duplication. Taking sorghum as the outgroup, it is likely that the loss of gene expression profiling contributes to the inflorescence diversity between tassel and ear, resulting in the unisexual flower architecture of maize. The sequence of highly expressed genes in the tassel is more conserved than the highly expressed genes in the ear.ConclusionThis study provides a high-resolution atlas of gene activity during inflorescence development and helps to unravel the potential evolution associated with the differentiation of the ear and tassel in maize.
Background Few studies have explored the association between DNA methylation and physical activity. The aim of this study was to evaluate the association of objectively measured hours of sedentary behavior (SB) and moderate physical activity (MPA) with DNA methylation. We further aimed to explore the association between SB or MPA related CpG sites and cardiometabolic traits, gene expression, and genetic variation. Results For discovery, we performed cross sectional analyses in pregnant women from the Epigenetics in pregnancy (EPIPREG) sample with both DNA methylation (Illumina MethylationEPIC BeadChip) and objectively measured physical activity data (SenseWear (TM) Pro 3 armband) (European = 244, South Asian = 109). For EWAS of SB and MPA, two main models were designed: model (1) a linear mixed model adjusted for age, smoking, blood cell composition, including ancestry as random intercept, and model (2) which was additionally adjusted for the total number of steps per day. In model 1, we did not identify any CpG sites associated with neither SB nor MPA. In model 2, SB was positively associated (false discovery rate, FDR < 0.05) with two CpG sites within the VSX1 gene. Both CpG sites were positively associated with BMI and were associated with several genetic variants in cis. MPA was associated with 122 significant CpG sites at FDR < 0.05 (model 2). We further analyzed the ten most statistically significant MPA related CpG sites and found that they presented opposite associations with sedentary behavior and BMI. We were not able to replicate the SB and MPA-related CpG sites in the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC). ALSPAC had available objectively measured physical activity data from Actigraph (without steps/day available) and leucocyte DNA methylation data collected during adolescence (n = 408, European). Conclusion This study suggests associations of objectively measured SB and MPA with maternal DNA methylation in peripheral blood leukocytes, that needs to be confirmed in larger samples of similar study design.
BackgroundPopulus tomentosa, known as Chinese white poplar, is indigenous and distributed across large areas of China, where it plays multiple important roles in forestry, agriculture, conservation, and urban horticulture. However, limited accessibility to the mitochondrial (mt) genome of P. tomentosa impedes phylogenetic and population genetic analyses and restricts functional gene research in Salicaceae family.ResultsSingle-molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing technology was used to sequence, assemble, and annotate the mt genome of P. tomentosa. This genome has a complex structure composed of four circular molecules ranging from 153,004 to 330,873 base pairs (bp). Each of these four circular molecules contains unique gene sequences that constitute the mt genome of P. tomentosa. The mt genome comprises 69 functional genes, including 38 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 26 tRNA genes, and 5 rRNA genes. After removing duplications, 19 different tRNA coding genes remain, though only 10 amino acids can be recognized. The noncoding region constitutes 93.38% of the mt genome, comprising a large number of repetitive sequences, gene spacer regions, and insertion from chloroplast sequences. Specifically, 40 chloroplast-derived sequences, with a total length of 24,381 bp, were identified in P. tomentosa.ConclusionsIn the current study, the results provide mitochondrial genomic evidence for the maternal origin of P. tomentosa and enhance understanding of the gene dialog between organelle genomes, contributing to the conservation and utilization of the genetic resources of P. tomentosa.
The current study aimed to detect the mutagenic impacts of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), which is produced by Aspergillus group fungi, via a high-plant genotoxicity test. Different durations of treatment (3 h, 6 h, and 12 h) were used to treat the Vicia faba root tips with varying concentrations of Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) following the approved protocol for plant assays published by the International Program on Chemical Safety (IPCS) and the World Health Organization (WHO). The data obtained indicated that AFB1 not only has the ability to induce various alterations in the process of mitosis, ranging from increasing to decreasing mitotic and phase indices but also leads to many mitotic aberrations. The abnormalities observed varied on the basis of the ratio of AFB1 to treatment time. The aberrations included micronuclei in interphase, stickiness; two groups ring star disturbed and oblique metaphase late separation diagonal bridge and laggard and disturbed. anaphase and telophase. This study showed that biomonitoring Vicia faba is a sustainable method for estimating the cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of applied AFB1. Additionally, AFB1 caused changes in the protein profile detected by SDS-PAGE, with each treated sample displaying a unique electrophoretic pattern due to the formation and disappearance of certain bands. The ISSR and RAPD assays changes in band numbers in all samples compared with the untreated control, and a decrease in genetic template stability (GTS) ratios was observed with higher levels of AFB1. The image cytometric data revealed a correlation between the dosage of AFB1 and its impact on cell cycle components in the meristematic cells of Vicia faba roots. Furthermore, an increase in AFB1 concentrationled to a decrease in B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl2) levels, an increase in chromatin condensation levels, and an increase in poly ADP-ribose polymorphism (PARP) levels.
Background Identifying markers or genes crucial for growth traits in Zhongwei goats is pivotal for breeding. Pinpointing genetic factors linked to body size gain enhances breeding efficiency and economic value. In this study, we used the MGISEQ-T7 platform to re-sequence 240 Zhongwei goats (133 male; 107 female) belonging to 5 metrics of growth traits at different growth stages (40 days and 6 months, here in after referred to as 40d and 6 m), namely, Body Weight (BW), Body Height (BH), Body Length (BL), Chest Circumference (CC), Tube Circumference (TC) were examined. A Genome-wide association study (GWAS) was conducted to identify candidate genes associated with the five indicators of body conformation traits, thereby establishing a foundation for subsequent investigations into the biological functions of these genes. Results A total of 19.89 Tb of raw data was generated with an average sequencing depth of about 20x. After quality control, 15,958,716 SNPs were available for the analysis. A total of 342 genome-wide significant SNPs were obtained. Among them, in the two physiological stages of 40d and 6 m, 147 and 32 SNPs were significantly associated with BW; 1 and 4 SNPs were significantly associated with BH; 19 and 6 SNPs were significantly associated with BL; 33 and 64 SNPs were significantly associated with CC, 34 and 2 SNPs were significantly associated with TC. These SNPs were annotated to 425 candidate genes. Finally, A total of 39 candidate genes are closely related to biological processes such as skeletal muscle development, skeletal formation, carcass quality, and embryonic development, where ADIPOQ, CCDD39, PTPRT, ZNF215, VRTN, ABCD4, DLST, ADAMTS2, ROBO1, AKAP13, AQPI, SOX2, and AHSG were identified as an important component of the genetic framework that may control somatic conformational traits in Zhongwei goats. which warrants further investigation and review. We verified the polymorphism of 11 SNPs by KASP, and found that Chr13_g.11,700,438 A > G, Chr15_g.37,120,328 A > G, Chr6_g.7,209,383 C > T, Chr20_g.51277932T > A, Chr19_g.17,078,199 A > G, and Chr1_g.79,943,276 C > T were significantly genotyped in verified populations (P < 0.001). Conclution It is the first GWAS study to analyze genomic data from 40d and 6 m of Zhongwei goats to understand the molecular genetic mechanisms of growth. Our research identified a series of SNPs and candidate genes associated with growth traits, which could assist us in developing the meat production trait in Zhongwei goats.
BackgroundSpermatogonia are essential for the continual production of sperm and regeneration of the entire spermatogenic lineage after injury. In mammals, spermatogonia are formed in the neonatal testis from prospermatogonia (also termed gonocytes), which are established from primordial germ cells during fetal development. Currently, the molecular regulation of the prospermatogonial to spermatogonia transition is not fully understood.ResultsIn this study, we examined the gene expression patterns of prospermatogonia, spermatogonia and testicular somatic cells at 4 different stages, including embryonic day (E) 12.5, E17.5 and postnatal days (P) 1 and 6, using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). We identified 5 different molecular states in the prospermogonial population and revealed gene expression dynamics in corresponding testicular somatic cells. Specifically, we found that prospermatogonia mainly receive signals, while Leydig cells and peritubular myoid cells are the mediators for transmitting signals, indicating their potential roles in regulating the development and differentiation of prospermatogonia. Transcription regulon analyses revealed the involvement of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in directing prospermogonial fate decisions. We then disrupted this transcription network by ectopic expression of inhibitor of differentiation 2 (Id2), which is a negative regulator of bHLH transcription factors. The overexpression of Id2 in prospermatogonia caused severe defects in the progression of prospermatogonia to spermatogonia.ConclusionTogether, these findings provide a crucial dataset for dissecting key genes that direct the establishment of the foundational spermatogonial pool and the fate transitions of different somatic cell lineages in the testis during fetal and neonatal periods of development.
Wool growth and fineness regulation is influenced by some factors such as genetics and environment. At the same time, lncRNA participates in numerous biological processes in animal production. In this research, we conducted a thorough analysis and characterization of the microstructure of wool, along with long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), their target genes, associated pathways, and Gene Ontology terms pertinent to the wool fineness development. The investigation utilized scanning electron microscopy and transcriptomic technology, focusing on two distinct types in Gansu alpine fine-wool sheep: coarse type (group C, MFD = 22.26 +/- 0.69 mu m, n = 6) and fine type (group F, MFD = 16.91 +/- 0.29 mu m, n = 6), which exhibit differing wool fiber diameters. The results showed that fine type wool fiber scales were more regularly distributed in rings with large scale spacing and smooth edges, while coarse type wool fiber scales were more irregularly arranged in tiles with relatively rougher edges, and the density of wool scales was greater than that of fine type wool. Furthermore, a comprehensive analysis revealed 164 differentially expressed lncRNAs along with 146 potential target genes linked to these lncRNAs in the skin tissues from groups C and F. Utilizing functional enrichment analysis on the target genes, we successfully identified a number of target genes might be associated with the improvement of wool fineness, such as FOXN1, LIPK, LOC101116068, LOC101106296, KRTAP5.4, KRT71, KRT82, DNASE1L2, which are related to hair follicle development, histidine metabolism, epidermal cell differentiation, oxidative phosphorylation and hair cycle process. Additionally, the interoperability network involving lncRNAs-mRNAs indicated lncRNAs (MSTRG.17445.2, XR_006060725.1, MSTRG.871.1, MSTRG.10907.4) might play a significant role in the wool growth development and fineness improvement process. In conclusion, the research enlarges the current lncRNAs database, providing a new insight for the investigation of wool fineness development in fine-wool sheep.
BackgroundThe Taihe black-boned silky fowl, a distinguished indigenous breed of chicken, is renowned for its dual utility in both traditional medicinal and culinary applications. However, the breed faces significant challenges due to its suboptimal reproductive capabilities and a notably brief egg-laying period, which have impeded its broader development and cultivation. In this research endeavor, we employed an advanced, rapid DIA (Data independent acquisition) quantitative proteomics method on the Astral platform to meticulously analyze the ovarian proteome of these chickens. By analyzing the ovarian proteomic information of Taihe black-boned silky fowl during peak and decline egg-laying periods, we aim to identify potential reproductive candidate proteins and the molecular mechanisms underlying egg-laying decline. This could enable us to implement interventions to improve the reproductive efficiency of this valuable breed.ResultIn this study, a total of 8,281 proteins were identified within the ovarian proteome of the Taihe black-boned silky fowl. Among these, 303 proteins exhibited significant differential expression, with 98 proteins significantly up-regulated and 205 proteins significantly down-regulated. The functional annotation of these proteins illuminated their crucial roles in the steroid hormone synthesis pathways, which are pivotal during the peak of egg production. Furthermore, during the later stages of laying, there was a noticeable upregulation of proteins associated with inflammatory senescence and oxidative stress. This change suggests an increase in reproductive stress within the ovary, highlighting the physiological shifts that affect productivity as the chickens age.ConclusionThis study identified key candidate protein markers in the Taihe black-boned silky fowl during critical phases of their reproductive cycle, specifically peak and late egg-laying periods. These findings contribute valuable new scientific insights that can be utilized for the breeding optimization and effective management of this unique breed. By elucidating the protein dynamics during different laying phases, the research offers potential strategies aimed at enhancing reproductive performance and extending the reproductive lifespan of the Taihe black-boned silky fowl. This could lead to significant improvements in both the sustainability and profitability of farming this indigenous breed.
BackgroundImproving the germination performance of bread wheat is an important breeding target in many wheat-growing countries where seedlings are often established in soils with high salinity levels. This study sought to characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying germination performance in salt-stressed wheat. To achieve this goal, a genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed on 292 Iranian bread wheat accessions, including 202 landraces and 90 cultivars.ResultsA total of 10 and 15 functional marker-trait associations (MTAs) were detected under moderate (60 mM NaCl) and severe (120 mM NaCl) salinity, respectively. From genomic annotation, 17 candidate genes were identified that were functionally annotated to be involved in the germination performance of salt-stressed wheat, such as CHX2, PK2, PUBs, and NTP10. Most of these genes play key roles in DNA/RNA/ATP/protein binding, transferase activity, transportation, phosphorylation, or ubiquitination and some harbored unknown functions that collectively may respond to salinity as a complex network.ConclusionThese findings, including the candidate genes, respective pathways, marker-trait associations (MTAs), and in-depth phenotyping of wheat accessions, improve knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for better germination performance of wheat seedlings under salinity conditions.
BackgroundBroussonetia papyrifera, B. monoica, and B. kaempferi belong to the genus Broussonetia (Moraceae). These three species hold significant economic and research values. However, few molecular markers have been effectively utilized for resource development and molecular genetic breeding of these species. Sequencing of their genomes allowed us to develop genomic markers (e.g. simple sequence repeats (SSRs)) and construct a high-density physical map.ResultsA total of 369,557, 332,627, and 276,245 SSRs were identified in 13 high-quality assembled pseudochromosomes and their unassembled scaffolds for B. papyrifera, B. monoica, and B. kaempferi, respectively. Among the identified genomic SSRs across the three species, short repeat sequences were more abundant, while long repeat sequences constituted a smaller proportion. Additionally, the predominant repeat motifs in the SSRs of the three Broussonetia species were composed of 'A' and 'T' repeats. Using B. papyrifera genome as a reference, 4,419 common SSRs were identified among these three species, while 2,048 SSRs were specific to B. kaempferi, and 4,285 SSRs were specific to B. monoica. Distribution analysis indicated a notable similarity in the distribution patterns of SSRs across the pseudochromosomes of these three species. Furthermore, of the identified SSRs, 28%, 31%, and 24% were mapped to genes in B. papyrifera, B. kaempferi, and B. monoica, respectively. Genic-mapped SSRs may regulate biological processes by influencing gene activity and protein function. To verify SSRs polymorphism, we selected 30 ones from 10,752 potentially polymorphic SSRs loci for PCR amplification among these three species, all of which were successfully amplified and exhibited polymorphism across these three species.ConclusionsThese findings are helpful for further research on the origin, evolution, and migration of Broussonetia species and also laid the foundation for the precise identification, systematic evaluation, and efficient utilization of the germplasm resources of Broussonetia species.
BackgroundMining functional gene modules from genomic data is an important step to detect gene members of pathways or other relations such as protein-protein interactions. This work explores the plausibility of detecting functional gene modules by factorizing gene-phenotype association matrix from the phenotype ontology data rather than the conventionally used gene expression data. Recently, the hierarchical structure of phenotype ontologies has not been sufficiently utilized in gene clustering while functionally related genes are consistently associated with phenotypes on the same path in phenotype ontologies.ResultsThis work demonstrates a hierarchical Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) framework, called Consistent Multi-view Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (CMNMF), which factorizes genome-phenome association matrix at consecutive levels of the hierarchical structure in phenotype ontology to mine functional gene modules. CMNMF constrains the gene clusters from the association matrices at two consecutive levels to be consistent since the genes are annotated with both the child-level phenotypes and the parent-level phenotypes in two levels. CMNMF also restricts the identified gene clusters to be densely connected in the phenotype ontology hierarchy. In the experiments on mining functionally related genes from mouse phenotype ontology and human phenotype ontology, CMNMF effectively improves clustering performance over the baseline methods. Gene ontology enrichment analysis is also conducted to verify its practical effectiveness to reveal meaningful gene modules.ConclusionsUtilizing the information in the hierarchical structure of phenotype ontology, CMNMF can identify functional gene modules with more biological significance than conventional methods. CMNMF can also be a better tool for predicting members of gene pathways and protein-protein interactions.
MotivationNext-generation sequencing technologies, such as whole genome sequencing (WGS), have become prominent in cancer genomics. However, managing, visualizing, and integratively analyzing WGS results across various bioinformatic pipelines remains challenging, particularly for non-bioinformaticians, hindering the usability of WGS data for biological discovery.ResultsWe developed Sherlock-Genome, an R Shiny app for data harmonization, visualization, and integrative analysis of WGS-based cancer genomics studies. Following FAIR principles, Sherlock-Genome provides a platform and guidelines for managing and sharing finalized sample-level WGS analysis results, enabling users to upload results, inspect analyses locally, and perform integrative analyses. It includes modules for major cancer genomic analyses, allowing interactive data visualizations and integrative analyses with other data types. Sherlock-Genome supports both local and cloud deployment, facilitating the sharing of results for related publications. This tool has the potential to be widely adopted in cancer genomics, significantly enhancing the accessibility and usability of sample-level WGS analysis results for comprehensive biological discovery and research advancements.Availability and implementationThe source code and installation instructions for Sherlock-Genome can be accessed via Github https://github.com/xtmgah/Sherlock-Genome. Documentation and data requirements for user project data can also be found on the same GitHub page.
BackgroundThere is increasing need for effective incorporation of high-dimensional genetics data from individuals with varied ancestry in genome-wide association (GWAS) analyses. Classically, multi-ancestry GWAS analyses are performed using statistical meta-analysis to combine results conducted within homogeneous ancestry groups. The emergence of cosmopolitan reference panels makes collective preprocessing of GWAS data possible, but impact on downstream GWAS results in a mega-analysis framework merits investigation. We utilized GWAS data from the multi-national Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome Study to investigate differences in GWAS findings using a homogeneous ancestry meta-analysis versus a heterogeneous ancestry mega-analysis pipeline. Maternal fasting and 1-hr glucose and metabolomics measured during a 2-hr 75-gram oral glucose tolerance test during early third trimester pregnancy were evaluated as phenotypes.ResultsFor the homogeneous ancestry meta-analysis pipeline, variant data were prepared by identifying sets of individuals with similar ancestry and imputing to ancestry-specific reference panels. GWAS was conducted within each ancestry group and results were combined using random-effects meta-analysis. For the heterogeneous ancestry mega-analysis pipeline, data for all individuals were collectively imputed to the Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) cosmopolitan reference panel, and GWAS was conducted using a unified mega-analysis. The meta-analysis pipeline identified genome-wide significant associations for 15 variants in a region close to GCK on chromosome 7 with maternal fasting glucose and no significant findings for 1-hr glucose. Associations in this same region were identified using the mega-analysis pipeline, along with a well-documented association at MTNR1B on chromosome 11 with both fasting and 1-hr maternal glucose. For metabolomics analyses, the number of significant findings in the heterogeneous ancestry mega-analysis far exceeded those from the homogeneous ancestry meta-analysis and confirmed many previously documented associations, but genomic inflation factors were much more variable.ConclusionsFor multi-ancestry GWAS, heterogeneous ancestry mega-analysis generates a rich set of variants for analysis using a cosmopolitan reference panel and results in vastly more significant, biologically credible and previously documented associations than a homogeneous ancestry meta-analysis approach. Genomic inflation factors do indicate that findings from the mega-analysis pipeline may merit cautious interpretation and further follow-up.
BackgroundTrimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) is a metabolite produced by gut microbiota, and its potential impact on lipid metabolism in mammals has garnered widespread attention in the scientific community. Bovine fatty liver disease, a metabolic disorder that severely affects the health and productivity of dairy cows, poses a significant economic burden on the global dairy industry. However, the specific role and pathogenesis of TMAO in bovine fatty liver disease remain unclear, limiting our understanding and treatment of the condition. This study aims to construct a bovine fatty liver cell model using an integrated approach that combines transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic data. The objective is to investigate the impact of TMAO on lipid metabolism at the molecular level and explore its potential regulatory mechanisms.ResultsWe established an in vitro bovine fatty liver cell model and conducted a comprehensive analysis of cells treated with TMAO using high-throughput omics sequencing technologies. Bioinformatics methods were employed to delve into the regulatory effects on lipid metabolism, and several key genes were validated through RT-qPCR. Treatment with TMAO significantly affected 4790 genes, 397 proteins, and 137 metabolites. KEGG enrichment analysis revealed that the significantly altered molecules were primarily involved in pathways related to the pathology of fatty liver disease, such as metabolic pathways, insulin resistance, hepatitis B, and the AMPK signaling pathway. Moreover, through joint analysis, we further uncovered that the interaction between TMAO-mediated AMPK signaling and oxidative phosphorylation pathways might be a key mechanism promoting lipid accumulation in the liver.ConclusionsOur study provides new insights into the role of TMAO in the pathogenesis of bovine fatty liver disease and offers a scientific basis for developing more effective treatment strategies.
BackgroundMyoblasts serve as the fundamental building blocks of muscle fibers, and there is a positive correlation between the diameter of myofibers during the juvenile phase and the rate of muscle growth, which does not change in adulthood. However, the molecular mechanisms governing myofiber diameter across various developmental stages in goats remain largely unclear.ResultsIn this study, we examined miRNA expression in the longissimus dorsi muscle tissue of goats at two distinct ages: one month, a period characterized by robust muscle growth, and nine months, when muscle development plateaus in adulthood. A total of 408 known miRNAs and 86 novel miRNAs were identified, with 32 miRNAs exhibiting differential expression between the two groups. A functional enrichment analysis of these targeted genes revealed significant enrichment in pathways closely correlated with skeletal muscle growth, development, and senescence. Notably, chi-miR-103-3p was identified among the DE miRNAs and appeared to play an important role in skeletal myoblast proliferation. Bioinformatics analysis, complemented by dual luciferase activity assays revealed that chi-miR-103-3p specifically targets the 3'UTR of FGF18. Subsequent cell transfection experiments demonstrated that chi-miR-103-3p suppresses the expression of FGF18 in goat myoblasts, thereby inhibiting cell proliferation. Moreover, FGF18 was observed to enhance the proliferation of goat myoblasts.ConclusionsCollectively, our data indicated that the elevated expression of chi-miR-103-3p in adult goat myoblasts significantly repressed FGF18 expression, thereby limiting rapid muscle growth. Proliferation and differentiation of myoblasts can affect myofiber number and cell volume expansion. These findings lay the foundation for further elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying muscle growth and development across different life stages of goats. Additionally, it could be a potential molecular marker for improving muscle production in goats.
BackgroundTemperature is a key determinant of ectotherms distribution and growth. During the Eriocheir sinensis breeding process, it was observed that crabs in high latitudes and altitude areas with low temperatures undergo diapause, they would overwinter and continue to grow into three-year-old individuals, whose final body size is significantly larger than the normal two-year-old crabs. The hepatopancreas is responsible for maintaining the nutritional balance and energy required for the crab survival. In this study, we aimed to compare the hepatopancreatic proteomic data between three-year-old and two-year-old crabs and clarify the relationship between genes and the final body size phenotype.ResultsThe analysis revealed that differentially expressed proteins were predominantly enriched in essential cellular processes such as ribosome, ribosome biogenesis, RNA degradation, proteasome, mRNA surveillance pathway, and RNA biogenesis. Increasing ribosome usage for protein biosynthesis was found to enhance the crab tolerance to low temperatures and extend their growth period. Simultaneously, the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway was primarily regulated to enhance the degradation of misfolded proteins induced by low temperatures, thus alleviating damage and ultimately resulting in a larger final size for the three-year-old crabs.ConclusionThis study provides insights into how low temperatures contribute to individual body size differences and regulate the life cycle, providing a basis for the future artificial breeding of E. sinensis.
BackgroundSugarcane is a crucial crop for both sugar and bioethanol production. The nobilization breeding and utilization of wild germplasm have significantly enhanced its productivity. However, the pollen sterility in Saccharum officinarum restricts its role to being a female parent in crosses with Saccharum spontaneum during nobilization breeding, resulting in a narrow genetic basis for modern sugarcane cultivars. Mitochondria, often referred to as the intracellular "energy factories", provide energy for plant life activities, and are also implicated in cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS).ResultsWe performed mitochondrial genome assembly and structural analysis of two Saccharum founding species. We discovered that the proportions of repeat sequences are the primary factor contributing to the variations in mitochondrial genome structure and size between the two Saccharum species. Heterologous expression of the mitochondrial chimeric gene ORF113, which is highly expressed in male-sterile S. officinarum flowers, significantly inhibits growth and ATP synthesis in yeast cells, making it a key candidate CMS-related gene in sugarcane. Furthermore, we developed two co-dominant simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers based on the mitochondrial genome, which can effectively distinguish the cytoplasmic types of the two Saccharum species.ConclusionIn this study, we identified structural variants and developed SSR molecular markers in the mitochondrial genomes of both S. officinarum and S. spontaneum. We also identified a novel mitochondrial chimeric ORF as a key candidate CMS-related gene. These findings offer valuable insights into variety identification, genetic resource development, and cross-breeding strategies in sugarcane.
Spatial transcriptomics technology enables the mapping of gene expression within tissues, allowing researchers to visualize the spatial distribution of RNA molecules and gain insights into cellular organization, interactions, and functions in their native environments. A variety of spatial technologies are now commercially available, each offering distinct technical parameters such as cellular resolution, detection sensitivity, gene coverage, and throughput. This wide range of options can make it challenges or create confusion for researchers to select the most appropriate platform for their specific research objectives. In this paper, we will analyze and compare seven major commercially available spatial platforms to guide researchers in choosing the most suitable option for their needs.
BackgroundDespite the rapid advancement of high-throughput sequencing, simple sequence repeats (SSRs) remain indispensable molecular markers for various applied and research tasks owing to their cost-effectiveness and ease of use. However, existing SSR markers cannot meet the growing demand for research on lotus (Nelumbo Adans.) given their scarcity and weak connections to the lotus genome.MethodsUsing whole-genome resequencing, active SSR loci were identified throughout the genomes of eight typical Asian lotus. After that, high polymorphism SSR molecular markers were mined from each 2n + 0.5 Mb site on each chromosome (e.g., Chr.1-2.5, 4.5, 6.5 Mb) through four steps: online primer design, primer pair evaluation, agarose gel electrophoresis testing using six Asian lotus, one American lotus, and two their hybrids, and DNA sequence alignment. Finally, the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) efficiency of several SSR markers was validated in 20 Asian temperate lotus, eight Asian tropical lotus, and one American lotus.ResultsA total of 463 SSR markers were developed based on each 2n + 0.5 Mb site of the eight lotus chromosomes (totaling 821.29 Mb). These markers were evenly distributed throughout the lotus genome at a density of 1 SSR per 1.76 Mb. The chromosomal locations of the SSR markers were determined precisely, and the specificity of the primer pairs for each site was verified by sequencing the PCR products. We further provided a set of genome-wide SSR loci, covering 129 per Mb, identified from eight representative Asian lotus, allowing other researchers to independently discover specific SSR markers for particular experiments.ConclusionThese SSR markers, which have a density of 1 SSR marker per 1.76 Mb in this study, will act as a bridge connecting lotus phenotypes with the genome. This work reveals a novel and convenient strategy for developing highly polymorphic SSR markers at any location throughout the lotus genome, and it sheds light on the development of SSR molecular markers in other plant species.
BackgroundMegalobrama amblycephala presents unsynchronized growth, which affects its productivity and profitability. The liver is essential for substance exchange and energy metabolism, significantly influencing the growth of fish.ResultsTo investigate the differential metabolites and genes governing growth, and understand the mechanism underlying their unsynchronized growth, we conducted comprehensive transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses of liver from fast-growing (FG) and slow-growing (SG) M. amblycephala individuals. A total of 2,097 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between FG and SG, with 830 genes exhibiting significantly higher expression level in FG. KEGG and GO enrichment analysis indicated that the DEGs with higher expression level were significantly correlated with insulin signaling pathway, steroid hormone and lipid metabolism related pathway (PPAR signaling pathway and fatty acid degradation). In the metabolomic analysis, 224 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) were detected, of which 128 were significantly more abundant in FG. These more abundant DEMs were prominently enriched in pathways associated with cell proliferation and energy metabolism (Oxidative phosphorylation, mTOR signaling pathway and FoxO signaling pathway). In addition, DEGs and DEMs in adenosine diphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis activity and associate with fatty acid metabolism, glucose metabolism, and amino acid metabolism pathways were both found in the transcriptomic and metabolomic integrated data. These findings suggest that the large amounts of energy generated by fatty acid, glucose metabolism and other energy metabolism pathway promote the rapid growth of FG.ConclusionsThis research is the first to integrate metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses of liver to identify key genes, metabolites, and pathways to uncover the molecular and metabolic mechanisms of unsynchronized growth in M. amblycephala. The identified metabolic and genes can be potential targets for selective breeding programs to improve growth performance in aquaculture.
Plant HKTs (High-affinity K+ transporters) are essential transporters for ion transport and homeostasis and play crucial roles in plant growth and stress responses. However, the evolution of HKTs in Populus species and their functions require further investigation. In this study, we identified 16 HKTs from six Populus species. All poplar HKTs were classified as Class I HKTs because of their physiological relationships and the conservation of amino acids in key structures, which aligns with their conserved evolutionary coding sequences. The analysis of the protein domains, motifs and gene structures of 16 poplar HKTs revealed consistent conservation, with the exception of two members. The number of homologs and their chromosome locations indicated the differentiation of HKTs during poplar evolution and adaptation. Poplar HKTs can be classified into two subgroups on the basis of their physiological relationships and distinct protein structures. Gene expression pattern analysis revealed that poplar HKTs presented relatively high expression levels in roots and stems under salt stress. Furthermore, cis-element analysis and protein interaction predictions provide insights into the functions of HKTs under salt stress through the activation of ion transporters, proline content, and ATPases regulated by hormonal signals and MYB transcription factors. In conclusion, our research established a theoretical framework for investigating the evolutionary relationships and functional roles of HKTs in Populus species and offered valuable insights into the functions and underlying mechanisms of poplar HKTs in specific tissues under various stress conditions.
BackgroundConserved non-coding sequences (CNS) are islands of non-coding sequences conserved across species and play an important role in regulating the spatiotemporal expression of genes. Identification of CNS provides valuable information about potentially functional genomic elements, regulatory regions, and helps to gain insights into the genetic basis of crop agronomic traits.ResultsHere, we comprehensively analyze CNS in maize, by comparing the genomes of maize inbred line B73 (Zea mays ssp. mays), its close wild relative Zea mays spp. mexicana, and other grasses in Poaceae, including sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), foxtail millet (Setaria italica) and two adlay (Coix lacryma) cultivars. There were 289,931 CNS found in two syntenic gene pairs, while 51,701 CNS were conserved within at least three species. To explore the regulatory characteristics of the CNS identified, the flanking regions of CNS were compared with the peaks called using both transposase-accessible chromatin with high-throughput sequencing (ATAC-seq) and chromatin immunoprecipitation with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-Seq) data of histone modifications. It was found that CNS in maize were enriched in open chromatin regions compared with randomly selected non-coding regions of similar length. A significant enrichment of transcription factor binding sites was found within CNS sequences, including different transcription factors involved in abiotic stress response, such as OBP (OBF-BINDING PROTEIN) family and Adof1 (Encodes dof zinc finger protein). To investigate the epigenetic modification patterns in CNS, ChIP-Seq data for histone modifications H3K9ac, H3K4me3, H3K36me3, H3K9me3, and H3K27ac were further analyzed to depict the changes along CNS. Our findings revealed significantly elevated levels of transcription-promoting histone modifications in the CNS regions compared to randomly selected non-coding sequences with an equal number and similar length. Notably, CNS were also identified on both Vgt1 (Vegetative to generative transition 1) and ZmCCT10. In addition, CNS with potential functions were identified based on SNPs within CNS significantly associated with various agronomic traits in maize, which holds potential utility in molecular breeding for maize.ConclusionsIn summary, we identified and characterized CNS in maize through genomic comparative analysis, which provides valuable insights into their potential regulatory effects on gene expression and phenotypic variation.
The E. coli strains harboring the polyketide synthase (pks) island encode the genotoxin colibactin, a secondary metabolite reported to have severe implications for human health and for the progression of colorectal cancer. The present study involves whole-genome-wide comparison and phylogenetic analysis of pks harboring E. coli isolates to gain insight into the distribution and evolution of these organisms. Fifteen E. coli strains isolated from patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) were sequenced, 13 of which harbored pks islands. In addition, 2,654 genomes from the public database were also screened for pks harboring E. coli genomes, 158 of which were pks-positive (pks+) isolates. Whole-genome-wide comparison and phylogenetic analysis revealed that 171 (158 + 13) pks+ isolates belonged to phylogroup B2, and most of the isolates belong to sequence types ST73 and ST95. One isolate from a UC patient was of the sequence type ST8303. The maximum likelihood tree based on the core genome of pks+ isolates revealed horizontal gene transfer across sequence types and serotypes. Virulome and resistome analyses revealed the0020preponderance of virulence genes and a reduced number of antimicrobial genes in pks+ isolates. This study significantly contributes to understanding the evolution of pks islands in E. coli.
Hypoxia is common in breast tumours and is linked to therapy resistance and advanced disease. To understand hypoxia-driven breast cancer progression, RT-qPCR is a widely used technique to quantify transcriptional changes that occur during malignant transformation. Reference genes (RGs) are endogenous RT-qPCR controls used to normalise mRNA levels, allowing accurate assessment of transcriptional changes. However, hypoxia reprograms transcription and post-transcriptional processing of RNA such that favoured RGs including GAPDH or PGK1 are unsuitable for this purpose. To address the need for robust RGs to study hypoxic breast cancer cell lines, we identified 10 RG candidates by analysing public RNA-seq data of MCF-7 and T-47D (Luminal A), and, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 (triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)) cells cultured in normoxia or hypoxia. We used RT-qPCR to determine RG candidate levels in normoxic breast cancer cells, removing TBP and EPAS1 from downstream analysis due to insufficient transcript abundance. Assessing primer efficiency further removed ACTB, CCSER2 and GUSB from consideration. Following culture in normoxia, acute, or chronic hypoxia, we ascertained robust non-variable RGs using RefFinder. Here we present RPLP1 and RPL27 as optimal RGs for our panel of two Luminal A and two TNBC cell lines cultured in normoxia or hypoxia. Our result enables accurate evaluation of gene expression in selected hypoxic breast cancer cell lines and provides an essential resource for assessing the impact of hypoxia on breast cancer progression.
Background: Rising seawater temperatures increasingly threaten coral reefs. The ability of coral larvae to withstand heat is crucial for maintaining reef ecosystems. Although several studies have investigated coral larvae's genetic responses to thermal stress, most relied on pooled sample sequencing, which provides population-level insights but may mask individual genotype variability. This study uses individual larval sequencing to investigate genotype-specific responses to heat stress and the selective pressures shaping their genomes, offering finer resolution and deeper insights. Results: This study investigates the larval response to heat stress before acquiring symbiotic algae, aiming to elucidate the relationship between coral genetic diversity and heat stress. Larvae sourced from eight Acropora digitifera colonies were subjected to ambient temperature (28 degrees C) and heat conditions (31 degrees C). The impact of heat stress on larval genetic diversity was assessed through sequencing. While overall genetic diversity, represented by pi, did not significantly differ between the control and heat-exposed groups, Tajima's D differed, indicating different selective pressures in each group. The genomic regions under higher and lower Tajima's D were not broadly shared among control and head conditions, implying that selective pressures operated in distinctive manners. Many larval protein-coding sequences were identified in this genomic region, and the codon evolution of many of these genes showed signs of positive selection. These results highlight the complex selective pressures on coral larvae under different temperatures. The genes showing signs of positive selection in response to heat stress may have also been influenced by historical temperature fluctuations, as suggested by their association with loci identified during Acroporid speciation. These loci under codon-level positive selection during speciation highlight the potential role of genetic diversity in shaping adaptation to environmental changes over evolutionary timescales. Conclusion: These findings underscore the significance of genetic diversity in coral reproduction for maintaining reef ecosystems. They also indicate that even minor heat stress can exert significant selective pressure, potentially leading to profound implications for coral reef ecosystems. This research is crucial for understanding the impact of rising seawater temperatures on coral reefs.
Infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV) is a highly virulent and rapidly transmissible fish virus that poses threats to the aquaculture of a wide variety of freshwater and marine fish. N6-methyladenosine (m6A), recognized as a common epigenetic modification of RNA, plays an important regulatory role during viral infection. However, the impact of m6A RNA methylation on the pathogenicity of ISKNV remains unexplored. Here, methylated RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeRIP-seq) coupled with RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was used to systematically detect variations in m6A methylation and gene expression between ISKNV-infected and noninfected MFF-1 cells, followed by functional enrichment and co-expression joint analysis. The findings revealed that the m6A methylation peaks were located mainly in coding sequences (CDSs), with more than 90% of the transcripts containing 1-5 m6A peaks. Through MeRIP-seq, 4361 differentially m6A-methylated mRNAs were identified. Gene enrichment analysis revealed that m6A-related genes were enriched in biological processes and pathways such as gene expression, cellular structure, immune responses, and cell death. Co-expression analysis revealed that the genes differentially expressed at both the mRNA and m6A modification levels were enriched in pathways such as the hippo, ErbB, and JAK-STAT pathways. The m6A modification at the genome-wide transcription level of ISKNV was subsequently shown to be pronounced in several pivotal genes, such as putative vascular endothelial growth factor, ribonucleotide reductase small subunit, and E3 ubiquitin ligase. This study comprehensively describes the m6A expression profile in ISKNV- and ISKNV-infected MFF-1 cells, providing a basis for investigating the role of m6A modification during ISKNV infection.
BackgroundThe advent of next generation sequencing technologies has enabled a surge in the number of whole genome sequences in public databases, and our understanding of the composition and evolution of bacterial genomes. Besides model organisms and pathogens, some attention has been dedicated to industrial bacteria, notably members of the Lactobacillaceae family that are commonly studied and formulated as probiotic bacteria. Of particular interest is Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM, an extensively studied strain that has been widely commercialized for decades and is being used for the delivery of vaccines and therapeutics.ResultsHere, we revisit the L. acidophilus genome, which was sequenced twenty years ago, and determined the core and pan genomes of 114 publicly available L. acidophilus strains, spanning commercial isolates, academic strains and clones from the scientific literature. Results indicate a predictable high level of homogeneity within the species, but also reveal surprising mis-assemblies. Furthermore, by investigating twenty one available L. acidophilus NCFM-derived variants, we document overall genomic stability, with no observed genomic re-arrangement or inversions.ConclusionThis study provides a comparative analysis of the currently available genomes for L. acidophilus and examines microevolution patterns for several strains derived from L. acidophilus NCFM, which revealed no to very few SNPs with strains sequenced at different points in time using different sequencing technologies and platforms. This re-affirms its suitability for industrial deployment as a probiotic and its use as an engineering chassis and delivery modality for novel biotherapeutics.
BackgroundMuscle and adipose tissue are the most critical indicators of beef quality, and their development and function are regulated by noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). However, the differential regulatory mechanisms of ncRNAs in muscle and adipose tissue remain unclear.ResultsIn this study, 2,343 differentially expressed mRNAs (DEMs), 235 differentially expressed lncRNAs (DELs), 95 differentially expressed circRNAs (DECs) and 54 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEmiRs) were identified in longissimus dorsi muscle (LD), subcutaneous fat (SF) and perirenal fat (VF) in Qinchuan beef cattle. The results of functional enrichment analysis showed that DEMs, DELs, DECs and DEmiRs were enriched in biological processes related to development and function of muscle and fat deposition, including skeletal muscle contraction, muscle organ development, PPAR signaling pathway, fatty acid metabolism and MAPK signaling pathway. Based on the competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) regulatory mechanism, we constructed a lncRNA/circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network consisting of 6 circRNAs, 5 lncRNAs, 6 miRNAs and 27 mRNAs. Among them, 55 ceRNA axes were involved, including circRNA12990 - bta-miR-133a_L-1R + 1 - MYO6/ZEB2, circRNA2893/MSTRG.28538.1/MSTRG.11613.4 - pma-miR-145-5p_R + 2 - EYA4 and MSTRG.26982.1 - bta-let-7e_R + 1 - RBM40.ConclusionsThis study identified a group of differentially expressed mRNAs, lncRNAs, circRNAs and miRNAs between muscle and adipose tissue and constructed a potential ceRNA regulatory network, which may serve as a foundation for studying the differential regulatory roles of ncRNAs in the development and function of muscle and adipose tissue.
BackgroundF plasmids are abundant in E. coli, carrying a variety of genetic cargo involved in fitness, pathogenicity, and antimicrobial resistance. ColV and pUTI89-like plasmids have drawn attention for their potential roles in various forms of extra-intestinal pathogenicity. However, the rates of their carriage and the overall diversity of F plasmids in E. coli bloodstream infections (BSI E. coli) remain unknown.MethodsWe performed a t-SNE-based cluster analysis of predicted F plasmids from a collection of 4711 BSI E. coli draft genomes to describe their diversity and abundance. We also screened them for markers of ColV and pUTI89-like plasmids, F plasmid replicon sequence types (RST) and E. coli sequence types (ST) to understand how genetic features were related to plasmid clusters.ResultsPredicted F plasmids in BSI E. coli draft genomes were embedded within five major clusters based on a model of complete F plasmid sequences. Nearly half of the clustered sequences belonged to two major clusters, which were associated with ColV and pUTI89-like marker genes, respectively. Genomes from the ColV cluster featured F2:A-:B1 and F24:A-B1 RSTs in association with ST95, ST58 and ST88, whilst the pUTI89-like cluster was mostly F29:A-:B10 linked to ST73, ST69, ST95 and ST131. Plasmids associated with different lineages of ST131 formed additional major clusters, whilst F51:A-:B10 plasmids in ST73 were also common.ConclusionsColV and pUTI89-like plasmid markers are predominant in BSI E. coli that carry F plasmids. These markers are associated with distinct clusters of plasmids across diverse sequence types of E. coli. We hypothesise that their abundance in BSI E. coli is partially driven by carriage of backbone genes previously shown to contribute to virulence in models of bloodstream infection. Their carriage by pandemic E. coli STs suggests clonal expansion also plays a role in their success in BSI. Ecological pathways via which these plasmids evolve, and spread are likely to be distinct as other studies show ColV is strongly associated with poultry and food animal production, whereas pUTI89-like plasmids appear to be mostly human-restricted.
BackgroundThe stone-dwelling genus Blastococcus plays a key role in ecosystems facing extreme conditions such as drought, salinity, alkalinity, and heavy metal contamination. Despite its ecological significance, little is known about the genomic factors underpinning its adaptability and resilience in such harsh environments. This study investigates the genomic basis of Blastococcus's adaptability within its specific microniches, offering insights into its potential for biotechnological applications.ResultsComprehensive pangenome analysis revealed that Blastococcus possesses a highly dynamic genetic composition, characterized by a small core genome and a large accessory genome, indicating significant genomic plasticity. Ecogenomic assessments highlighted the genus's capabilities in substrate degradation, nutrient transport, and stress tolerance, particularly on stone surfaces and archaeological sites. The strains also exhibited plant growth-promoting traits, enhanced heavy metal resistance, and the ability to degrade environmental pollutants, positioning Blastococcus as a candidate for sustainable agriculture and bioremediation. Interestingly, no correlation was found between the ecological or plant growth-promoting traits (PGPR) of the strains and their isolation source, suggesting that these traits are not linked to their specific environments.ConclusionsThis research highlights the ecological and biotechnological potential of Blastococcus species in ecosystem health, soil fertility improvement, and stress mitigation strategies. It calls for further studies on the adaptation mechanisms of the genus, emphasizing the need to validate these findings through wet lab experiments. This study enhances our understanding of microbial ecology in extreme environments and supports the use of Blastococcus in environmental management, particularly in soil remediation and sustainable agricultural practices.
Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) plays important roles in animals and plants. In filamentous fungi, however, their biological function in infection stage has been poorly studied. Here, we investigated the landscape and regulation of lncRNA in the filamentous plant pathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea by strand-specific RNA-seq of multiple infection stages. In total, 1837 lncRNAs have been identified in B. cinerea. A large number of lncRNAs were found to be antisense to mRNAs, forming 743 sense-antisense pairs, of which 55 antisense lncRNAs and their respective sense transcripts were induced in parallel as the infection stage. Although small RNAs were produced from these overlapping loci, antisense lncRNAs appeared not to be involved in gene silencing pathways. In addition, we found the alternative splicing events occurred in lncRNA. These results highlight the developmental stage-specific nature and functional potential of lncRNA expression in the infection stage and provide fundamental resources for studying infection stage-induced lncRNAs.
BackgroundThe Joint Programming Initiative on Antimicrobial Resistance (JPIAMR) networks 'Seq4AMR' and 'B2B2B AMR Dx' were established to promote collaboration between microbial whole genome sequencing (WGS) and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) stakeholders. A key topic discussed was the frequent variability in results obtained between different microbial WGS-related AMR gene prediction workflows. Further, comparative benchmarking studies are difficult to perform due to differences in AMR gene prediction accuracy and a lack of agreement in the naming of AMR genes (semantic conformity) for the results obtained. To illustrate this problem, and as a capacity-building exercise to encourage stakeholder involvement, a comparative Galaxy-based BenchAMRking platform was developed and validated using datasets from bacterial species with PCR-verified AMR gene presence or absence information from abritAMR.ResultsThe Galaxy-based BenchAMRking platform (https://erasmusmc-bioinformatics.github.io/benchAMRking/) specifically focusses on the steps involved in identifying AMR genes from raw reads and sequence assemblies. The platform currently comprises four well-characterised and published workflows that have previously been used to identify AMR genes using WGS data from several different bacterial species. These four workflows, which include the ISO certified abritAMR workflow, make use of different computational tools (or tool versions), and interrogate different AMR gene sequence databases. By utilising their own data, users can investigate potential AMR gene-calling problems associated with their own in silico workflows/protocols, with a potential use case outlined in this publication.ConclusionsBenchAMRking is a Galaxy-based comparison platform where users can access, visualise, and explore some of the major discrepancies associated with AMR gene prediction from microbial WGS data.
BackgroundBooklice, belonging to the genus Liposcelis (Psocodea: Liposcelididae), commonly known as psocids, infest a wide range of stored products and are implicated in the transmission of harmful microorganisms such as fungi and bacteria. The olfactory system is critical for insect feeding and reproduction. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms of the olfactory system in booklice is crucial for developing effective control strategies. In this study, we aim to bridge this knowledge gap by leveraging the transcriptome and genome data from five Liposcelis species.ResultUsing HMMER method and manual annotation, we have identified common gene families associated with olfactory processes, including odorant binding proteins (OBPs), chemosensory proteins (CSPs), odorant receptors (ORs), ionotropic receptors (IRs), and sensory neuron membrane proteins (SNMPs). Specifically, we identified 94, 118, 26, 47, and 34 olfactory-related genes in L. bostrychophila, L. tricolor, L. entomophila, L. decolor, and L. yangi, respectively. Comparison of quantities revealed that the number of ORs and IRs in the genome is significantly higher than those identified in the transcriptome. This discrepancy may be due to the specific expression of these genes in certain tissues or their lack of expression during the experimental stage. Simultaneously, analysis of gene expression profiles across different developmental stages revealed varying periods of peak expression for olfactory-related genes. These results suggest that the identification of olfactory-related genes in booklice on a genome-wide scale is more feasible and reliable than using a transcriptome-based approach. Additionally, compared to parasitic lice, booklice possess significantly more olfactory-related genes. This increase may be due to the inability of parasitic lice to survive without a host, whereas booklice have a wide range of feeding habits and live in complex and variable environments. Furthermore, we observed that the IR gene family in L. tricolor has undergone a certain degree of amplification, which may facilitate its adaptation to diverse environmental conditions.ConclusionsWe identified olfactory-related genes of five Liposcelis species for the first time, providing valuable insights for future functional investigations into olfactory genes associated with pheromone and odorant recognition. These discoveries present promising targets for effectively managing psocid pests.
BackgroundProlonged natural selection and artificial breeding have contributed to increased uniformity within the Tibetan sheep population, resulting in a reduction in genetic diversity and the establishment of selective signatures in the genome. This process has led to a loss of heterozygosity in specific genomic regions and the formation of Runs of Homozygosity (ROH). Current research on ROH predominantly focuses on inbreeding and the signals of selection; however, there is a paucity of investigation into the genetic load and selective pressures associated with ROH, both within these regions and beyond. On one hand, genes located situated ROH hotspot regions exhibit a degree of conservation in their genomic segments; on the other hand, these regions may also serve as critical loci for identifying signals of selection.ResultsHigh-throughput re-sequencing technology was utilized to investigate the ROH hotspot regions across 11 Tibetan sheep populations, resulting in the identification of ten conserved genes (ARHGEF16, Tom1l2, PRDM16, PEMT, SREBF1, Rasd1, Nt5m, MED9, FLCN, RAI1) that are associated with lipid metabolism, lactation, and development. These genes exhibited highly conserved within the ROH hotspot regions across all Tibetan sheep populations. Employing the integrated haplotype score (iHS) method, we screened for selective sites within frequently observed ROH hotspot regions to elucidate genomic differences among Tibetan sheep populations. A comprehensive analysis was conducted, involving Rnhom, dN/dS ratios, missense/synonymous ratios, and loss-of-function (LOF)/synonymous ratios, to investigate the accumulation of deleterious genes and the associated genetic load both within and outside ROH hotspot regions. The results revealed a higher accumulation of deleterious genes and a reduced genetic load within the ROH regions.ConclusionsThis study provides a comprehensive and precise genomic analysis and interpretation of Tibetan sheep, offering theoretical basis for genetic breeding and evolution in Tibetan sheep.
BackgroundPleuronectiformes, also known as flatfish, are important model and economic animals. However, a comprehensive genome survey of their important organelles, mitochondria, has been limited. Therefore, we aim to analyze the genomic structure, codon preference, nucleotide diversity, selective pressure and repeat sequences, as well as reconstruct the phylogenetic relationship using the mitochondrial genomes of 111 flatfish species.ResultsOur analysis revealed a conserved gene content of protein-coding genes and rRNA genes, but varying numbers of tRNA genes and control regions across species. Various gene rearrangements were found in flatfish species, especially for the rearrangement of nad5-nad6-cytb block in Samaridae family, the swapping rearrangement of nad6 and cytb gene in Bothidae family, as well as the control region translocation and tRNA-Gln gene inversion in the subfamily Cynoglossinae, suggesting their unique evolutionary history and/or functional benefit. Codon usage showed obvious biases, with adenine being the most frequent nucleotide at the third codon position. Nucleotide diversity and selective pressure analysis suggested that different protein-coding genes underwent varying degrees of evolutionary pressure, with cytb and cox genes being the most conserved ones. Phylogenetic analysis using both whole mitogenome information and concatenated independently aligned protein-coding genes largely mirrored the taxonomic classification of the species, but showed different phylogeny. The identification of simple sequence repeats and various long repetitive sequences provided additional complexity of genome organization and offered markers for evolutionary studies and breeding practices.ConclusionsThis study represents a significant step forward in our comprehension of the flatfish mitochondrial genomes, providing valuable insights into the structure, conservation and variation within flatfish mitogenomes, with implications for understanding their evolutionary history, functional genomics and fisheries management. Future research can delve deeper into conservation biology, evolutionary biology and functional usages of variations.
BackgroundSince their domestication, recent inbreeding together with intensive artificial selection and population bottlenecks have allowed the prevalence of deleterious mutations and the increase of runs-of-homozygosity (ROH) in domestic pigs. This makes pigs a good model to understand the genetic underpinnings of inbreeding depression.ResultsHere we integrated a comprehensive dataset comprising 7239 domesticated pigs and wild boars genotyped by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips, along with phenotypic data encompassing growth, reproduction and disease-associated traits. Our study revealed differential ROH landscapes during domestication and artificial selection of Eurasian pigs. We observed associations between ROH burden and phenotypic traits such as body conformation and susceptibility to diseases like scrotal hernia. By examining associations of whole-genome and regional ROH burden with gene expression, we identified specific genes and pathways affected by inbreeding depression. Associations of regional ROH burden with gene expression also enabled the discovery of novel regulatory elements. Lastly, we inferred recessive lethal mutations by examining depletion of ROH in an inbred population with relatively small sample size, following by fine mapping with sequencing data.ConclusionsThese findings suggested that both phenotypic and genetic variations have been reshaped by inbreeding, and provided insights to the genetic mechanisms underlying inbreeding depression.
BackgroundAdditional to total protein content, the amino acid (AA) profile is important to the nutritional value of soybean seed. The AA profile in soybean seed is a complex quantitative trait controlled by multiple interconnected genes and pathways controlling the accumulation of each AA. With a total of 621 soybean germplasm, we used three genome-wide association study (GWAS)-based approaches to investigate the genomic regions controlling the AA content and profile in soybean. Among those approaches, the GWAS network analysis we implemented takes advantage of the relationships between specific AAs to identify the genetic control of AA profile.ResultsFor Approach I, GWAS were performed for the content of 24 single AAs under all environments combined. Significant SNPs grouping into 16 linkage disequilibrium (LD) blocks from 18 traits were identified. For Approach II, the individual AAs were grouped by five families according to their metabolic pathways and were examined based on the sum, ratios, and interactions of AAs within the same biochemical family. Significant SNPs grouping into 35 LD blocks were identified, with SNPs associated with traits from the same biochemical family often positioned on the same LD blocks. Approach III, a correlation-based network analysis, was performed to assess the empirical relationships among AAs. Two groups were described by the network topology, Group 1: Ala, Gly, Lys, available Lys (Alys), and Thr and Group 2: Ile and Tyr. Significant SNPs associated with a ratio of connected AAs or a ratio of a single AA to its fully or partially connected metabolic groups were identified within 9 LD blocks for Group 1 and 2 LD blocks for Group 2. Among 40 identified QTL for AA or AA-derived traits, three genomic regions were novel in terms of seed composition traits (oil, protein, and AA content). An additional 24 regions had previously not been specifically associated with the AA content.ConclusionsOur results confirmed loci identified from previous studies but also suggested that network approaches for studying AA contents in soybean seed are valuable. Three genomic regions (Chr 5: 41,754,397-41,893,109 bp, Chr 9: 1,537,829-1,806,586 bp, and Chr 20: 31,554,795-33,678,257 bp) were significantly identified by all three approaches. Yet, the majority of associations between a genomic region and an AA trait were approach- and/or environment-specific. Using a combination of approaches provides insights into the genetic control and pleiotropy among AA contents, which can be applied to mechanistic understanding of variation in AA content as well as tailored nutrition in cultivars developed from soybean breeding programs.
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is a prevalent condition characterized by defective heart development, causing premature death and stillbirths among infants. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have provided insights into the role of genetic variants in CHD pathogenesis through the identification of a comprehensive set of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Notably, 90-95% of these variants reside in the noncoding genome, complicating the understanding of their underlying mechanisms. Here, we developed a systematic computational pipeline for the identification and analysis of CHD-associated SNPs spanning both coding and noncoding regions of the genome. Initially, we curated a thorough dataset of SNPs from GWAS-catalog and ClinVar database and filtered them based on CHD-related traits. Subsequently, these CHD-SNPs were annotated and categorized into noncoding and coding regions based on their location. To study the functional implications of noncoding CHD-SNPs, we cross-validated them with enhancer-specific histone modification marks from developing human heart across 9 Carnegie stages and identified potential cardiac enhancers. This approach led to the identification of 2,056 CHD-associated putative enhancers (CHD-enhancers), 38.9% of them overlapping with known enhancers catalogued in human enhancer disease database. We identified heart-related transcription factor binding sites within these CHD-enhancers, offering insights into the impact of SNPs on TF binding. Conservation analysis further revealed that many of these CHD-enhancers were highly conserved across vertebrates, suggesting their evolutionary significance. Utilizing heart-specific expression quantitative trait loci data, we further identified a subset of 63 CHD-SNPs with regulatory potential distributed across various cardiac tissues. Concurrently, coding CHD-SNPs were represented as a protein interaction network and its subsequent binding energy analysis focused on a pair of proteins within this network, pinpointed a deleterious coding CHD-SNP, rs770030288, located in C2 domain of MYBPC3 protein. Overall, our findings demonstrate that SNPs have the potential to disrupt gene regulatory systems, either by affecting enhancer sequences or modulating protein-protein interactions, which can lead to abnormal developmental processes contributing to CHD pathogenesis.
BackgroundArbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi form a highly adaptable and versatile group of fungi found in natural and man-managed ecosystems. Effector secreted by AM fungi influence symbiotic relationship by modifying host cells, suppressing host defense and promoting infection to derive nutrients from the host. Here, we conducted a reference-based transcriptome sequencing of Funneliformis mosseae BR221 to enhance understanding on the molecular machinery involved in the establishment of interaction between host and AM fungi.ResultsA total of 163 effector proteins were identified in F. mosseae isolate BR221, of these, 79.14% are extracellular effectors and 5.5% are predicted cytoplasmic effectors. In silico prediction using a pathogen-host interaction database suggested four of the 163 effectors could be crucial in establishing AM fungi-host interactions. Protein-protein docking analysis revealed interactions between these potential effectors and plant proteins known to be differentially expressed during mycorrhizal association, such as defensins, aquaporins, and PTO proteins. These interactions are multifaceted in modulating host physiological and defense mechanisms, including immune suppression, hydration, nutrient uptake, and oxidative stress modulation.ConclusionsThese findings of the current study provide a foundational understanding of fungal-host molecular interactions and open avenues for exploring pathways influenced by these effectors. By deepening our knowledge of these mechanisms, the use of AM fungi in biofertilizer formulations can be refined by selecting strains with specific effectors that enhance nutrient uptake, improve drought and disease resistance, and tailor the fungi's symbiotic efficiency to different crops or environmental conditions, thus contributing to more targeted and sustainable agricultural practices.
PurposeCorneal dysmorphologies (CDs) are typically classified as either regressive degenerative corneal dystrophies (CDtrs) or defective growth and differentiation-driven corneal dysplasias (CDyps). Both eye disorders have multifactorial etiologies. While previous work has elucidated many aspects of CDs, such as presenting symptoms, epidemiology, and pathophysiology, the genetic mechanisms remain incompletely understood. The purpose of this study was to analyze phenotype data from 8,707 knockout mouse lines to identify new genes associated with the development of CDs in humans. Methods8,707 knockout mouse lines phenotyped by the International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium were queried for genes associated with statistically significant (P < 0.0001) abnormal cornea morphology to identify candidate CD genes. Corneal abnormalities were investigated by histopathology. A literature search was used to determine the proportion of candidate genes previously associated with CDs in mice and humans. Phenotypes of human orthologues of mouse candidate genes were compared with known human CD genes to identify protein-protein interactions and molecular pathways using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING), Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. ResultsAnalysis of data from 8,707 knockout mouse lines identified 213 candidate CD genes. Of these, 37 (17%) genes were previously known to be associated with CD, including 14 in the mouse, 16 in humans, and 7 in both. The remaining 176 (83%) genes have not been previously implicated in CD. We also searched publicly available RNAseq data and found that 131 of the total 213 (61.5%) were expressed in adult human corneal tissue. STRING analysis showed several interactions within and between candidate and established CD proteins. All cellular pathways of the established genes were found in the PANTHER analysis of the candidate genes. Several of the candidate genes were implicated in corneal disease, such as TGF-ss signaling. We also identified other possible underappreciated mechanisms relevant to the human cornea. ConclusionsWe identified 213 mouse genes that resulted in statistically significant abnormal corneal phenotypes in knockout mice, many of which have not previously been implicated in corneal pathology. Bioinformatic analyses implicated candidate genes in several signaling pathways which are potential therapeutic targets.
BackgroundIdentification of global transcriptional events is crucial for genome annotation, as accurate annotation enhances the efficiency and comparability of genomic information across species. However, the annotation of transcripts in the cucumber genome remains to be improved, and many transcriptional events have not been well studied.ResultsWe collected 1,904 high-quality public cucumber transcriptome samples from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) to identify and annotate transcript isoforms in the cucumber genome. Over 44.26 billion Q30 clean reads were mapped to the cucumber genome with an average mapping rate of 92.75%. Transcriptome assembly identified 151,453 transcripts spanning 20,442 loci. Among these, 12.7% of transcripts exactly matched annotated genes in the cucumber reference genome. More than 80% of the transcripts were classified as novel isoforms. Approximately 96.6% of these isoforms originated from known gene loci, while around 3.3% were derived from novel gene loci. Coding potential prediction identified 4,543 long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) across 3,376 loci. Building on these results, we identified tissue-specific transcripts in 10 tissues. Among that, 1,655 annotated genes and 4,214 predicted transcripts were considered as tissue-specific. The root exhibited the highest number of tissue-specific transcripts, followed by shoot apex. Subsequent selective pressure analysis revealed that tissue-specific regions experienced stronger directional selection compared to non-specific regions.ConclusionsBy analyzing thousands of published transcriptome data, we identified abundant transcriptional events and tissue-specific transcripts in cucumbers. This study presented here adds the great value to the public data and offers insights for further exploration of a more comprehensive tissue regulatory network in cucumber.
Background Rex rabbit is famous for its silky and soft fur coat, a characteristic predominantly attributed to its hair follicles. Numerous studies have confirmed the crucial roles of mRNAs and non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in regulating key cellular processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and immunity. However, their involvement in the regulation of the hair cycle in Rex rabbits remains unknown. Results In this study, we identified the hair follicle stages of Rex rabbits aged 3 to 5.5 months. Skin samples collected at 4, 5 and 5.5 months, representing the morphological features of the anagen, catagen and telogen stage separately, were finally selected for whole-transcriptome analysis. 25,736 mRNA, 8280 lncRNA, 24,885 circRNA and 1138 miRNA transcripts were identified. 6027 differently expressed mRNAs (DEGs), 2381 differently expressed lncRNAs (DELs), 438 differently expressed circRNAs (DECs) and 167 differently expressed miRNAs (DEMs) were detected in the anagen vs. catagen (AvC) comparison. 4092 DEGs, 1540 DELs, 356 DECs and 141 DEMs were detected in the anagen vs. telogen (AvT) comparison. 2290 DEGs, 779 DELs, 249 DECs and 92 DEMs were detected in the catagen vs. telogen (CvT) comparison. DEGs were primarily enriched in GO items including plasma membrane, integral component of plasma membrane and extracellular space. KEGG enrichment analysis revealed that DEGs were mainly enriched in PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, cell cycle and Wnt signaling pathway (p < 0.05). KEGG analysis showed trans-acting genes of DELs were significantly enriched in Hippo signaling pathway, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway and Melanogenesis. Target genes of DEMs were mainly enriched in MAPK signaling pathway, Wnt signaling pathway, ECM-receptor interaction and Signaling pathways regulating pluripotency of stem cells. Based on the ceRNA mechanism, lncRNA/circRNA-miRNA-mRNA networks were constructed involving 9 DECs, 437 DELs, 50 DEMs and 416 DEGs. Conclusions Totally, this study provides comprehensive insights into the expression patterns of protein-coding genes and non-coding transcripts throughout the HF cycle, and enhancing the understanding of the regulatory mechanisms underlying mammalian hair fiber development.
BackgroundThe entomopathogenic fungus, Isaria fumosorosea, shows promise as a biological control agent in managing the diamondback moth (DBM) Plutella xylostella, a highly destructive global pest of cruciferous vegetables. To date, the miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks underlying the immune response of DBM to I. fumosorosea infection are still poorly understood. Here, we characterize the expression profiles of miRNA and mRNA, and construct the miRNA-gene regulatory network in DBM infected with I. fumosorosea.ResultsWe identified 580 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 55 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs) in I. fumosorosea-infected DBM. Among these DEGs, we found 28 immunity-related genes, which mainly include pattern recognition receptors, signal modulators, and immune effectors. Integrated analysis discovered 87 negative correlation pairs between miRNA and mRNA, involving 40 DEMs and 62 DEGs in infected DBM. Additionally, 13 miRNAs and 10 corresponding mRNAs were identified as candidate miRNA-mRNA pairs for DBM immunity against fungal infection. Gene functional enrichment analysis indicated that these miRNAs could target genes associated with various pathways, such as the immune system, infectious diseases, digestive system, endocrine system, nervous system, and signal transduction. Finally, the regulatory relationships of six miRNA-mRNA pairs were validated using quantitative reverse transcription PCR.ConclusionsFor the first time, we present integrated miRNA and mRNA data to elucidate the immune response of the DBM to fungal infection. Our findings enhance the understanding of the immune response of the DBM to entomopathogenic fungi infection.
BackgroundAvian mycoplasmas are small bacteria associated with several pathogenic conditions in many wild and poultry bird species. Extensive genomic data are available for many avian mycoplasmas, yet no comparative studies focusing on this group of mycoplasmas have been undertaken so far.ResultsHere, based on the comparison of forty avian mycoplasma genomes belonging to ten different species, we provide insightful information on the phylogeny, pan/core genome, energetic metabolism, and virulence of these avian pathogens. Analyses disclosed considerable inter- and intra-species genomic variabilities, with genome sizes that can vary by twice as much. Phylogenetic analysis based on concatenated orthologous genes revealed that avian mycoplasmas fell into either Hominis or Pneumoniae groups within the Mollicutes and could split into various clusters. No host co-evolution of avian mycoplasmas can be inferred from the proposed phylogenetic scheme. With 3,237 different gene clusters, the avian mycoplasma group under study proved diverse enough to have an open pan genome. However, a set of 150 gene clusters was found to be shared between all avian mycoplasmas, which is likely encoding essential functions. Comparison of energy metabolism pathways showed that avian mycoplasmas rely on various sources of energy. Superposition between phylogenetic and energy metabolism groups revealed that the glycolytic mycoplasmas belong to two distinct phylogenetic groups (Hominis and Pneumoniae), while all the arginine-utilizing mycoplasmas belong only to Hominis group. This can stand for different evolutionary strategies followed by avian mycoplasmas and further emphasizes the diversity within this group. Virulence determinants survey showed that the involved gene arsenals vary significantly within and between species, and could even be found in species often reported apathogenic. Immunoglobulin-blocking proteins were detected in almost all avian mycoplasmas. Although these systems are not exclusive to this group, they seem to present some particular features making them unique among mycoplasmas.ConclusionThis comparative genomic study uncovered the significant variable nature of avian mycoplasmas, furthering our knowledge on their biological attributes and evoking new hallmarks.
BackgroundThe golden pompano (Trachinotus ovatus) is an economically significant warm-water aquaculture species in China. The time required for sexual maturity of T. ovatus is relatively long. Consequently, it has prompted researchers to investigate gonadal development process of this fish. To gain further insight into the function of competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) in the gonads of T. ovatus and the regulatory mechanism of the ceRNA network, whole transcriptome libraries were constructed from the testes and ovaries.ResultsOverall, a total of 96 differentially expressed microRNAs (DE-miRNAs), 2,338 differentially expressed messenger RNAs (DE-mRNAs), 973 differentially expressed long non-coding RNAs (DE-lncRNAs), and 94 differentially expressed circular RNAs (DE-circRNAs) were identified. Additionally, a ceRNA network was constructed, and enrichment analysis confirmed the involvement of numerous pathways in reproduction and gonadal development, including the TGF-beta signaling pathway and GnRH signaling pathway. The ceRNA network analysis revealed that the oni-let-7d-1-p3 and PC-3p-112794_13 may play significant roles in T. ovatus gonadal development. And we have observed a possible relationship related to gonadal development involving R-spondin-1 (Rspo1), oni-let-7d-1-p3, and MSTRG.14909.1 (lnc-TGF beta R). Dual-luciferase gene reporter system and fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses preliminary verified the regulation relationship between Rspo1 and oni-let-7d-1-p3, as well as lnc-TGF beta R and oni-let-7d-1-p3 in the cytoplasm of sertoli cells.ConclusionIt is hypothesized that the lnc-TGF beta R functions as a sponge for oni-let-7d-1-p3, participating in regulating the process of testis development. These findings could enhance our understanding of ncRNAs in gonadal development. It also provides new insight into the function of ncRNAs and the regulatory relationship of ceRNA between males and females. These results might contribute to discussions on the regulation of ncRNA during gametogenesis.
BackgroundPaeonia section Moutan DC. is a significant perennial subshrub, the ornamental value of which heavily depends on the type of flower it possesses. MADS-box transcription factors have a particular impact on the intricate process of floral organ development and differentiation. The release of the whole-genome data from Paeonia ostii now allows us to conduct a thorough investigation of the tree peony MADS-box gene family.ResultsIn this study, we identified 110 MADS-box genes in Paeonia ostii that were classified into 5 subgroups. Gene structure, domain and motif analyses revealed the conservation of the structure of these subgroups. Analysis of the cis-acting elements revealed that the 110 PoMADS genes contained different kinds of hormones and stress-related cis-acting elements in their promoter regions. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis was employed to validate the expression patterns of some PoMADS genes related to floral organ development. Genome collinearity analysis with Arabidopsis and grape revealed the conservation of PoMADS genes during evolution. A total of 857 SSRs were identified by analysing the genome sequences of identified genes. We additionally created protein-protein interaction networks for PoMADS proteins and analysed proteins that could interact among PoMADSs in Arabidopsis thaliana and grape.ConclusionThese findings offer fundamental insights for understanding the function of the MADS-box gene family, which can aid in the selection and breeding of tree peony varieties with high ornamental value in addition to supporting the understanding of the process of tree peony floral organogenesis.
BackgroundThe fall armyworm (FAW) Spodoptera frugiperda, a highly invasive, polyphagous pest, poses a global agricultural threat. It has two strains, the C-corn and R-rice strains, each with distinct host preferences. This study compares detoxification enzyme gene families across these strains and related Spodoptera species to explore their adaptation to diverse host plant metabolites.ResultsA total of 1,995 detoxification-related genes, including cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (CYPs), carboxylesterases (COEs), glutathione S-transferases (GSTs), UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), and ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABCs), were identified across the genus Spodoptera, including S. littoralis, S. litura, S. picta, S. exigua, and both FAW strains. A higher abundance of phase I detoxification enzymes (CYPs and COEs) and GSTs was observed in Spodoptera species, while FAW strains exhibited fewer detoxification genes, with notable differences in copy numbers between the C and R strains. Analyses at the subfamily level revealed significant variation in gene distribution and expression, particularly within phase I and II detoxification enzymes. Expansions in CYP6AE were detected in the C strain, while contractions in GST-epsilon, CYP9A, CYP4M, UGT33B, and UGT33F occurred in both strains. In contrast, no substantial variation was observed in phase III ABC enzymes. Functional predictions and protein interaction networks suggest a broader expansion of metabolism-related genes in the R strain compared to the C strain.ConclusionsThese findings emphasize the pivotal role of phase I and II detoxification enzymes in host adaptation, providing molecular insights into FAW's capacity for host range expansion, which are crucial for devising targeted and sustainable pest management strategies.Graphical AbstractThe differential expression of detoxification enzyme gene families in different strains of Spodoptera frugiperda.
BackgroundGyrodactylus von Nordmann, 1832, a genus of viviparous parasites within the family Gyrodactylidae, contains one of the largest nominal species in the world. Gyrodactylus pseudorasborae Ondra & ccaron;kov & aacute;, Seifertov & aacute; & Tkachenko, 2023 widely distributed in Europe and China, although its mitochondrial genome remains unclear. This study aims to sequence the mitogenome of G.pseudorasborae and clarify its phylogenetic relationship within the Gyrodactylidea. The mitochondrial genome of G. pseudorasborae was amplified in six parts from a single parasite, sequenced using primer walking, annotated and analyzed using bioinformatic tools.ResultsThe mitochondrial genome of G. pseudorasborae is 14,189 bp in length, containing 12 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 22 transfer RNA genes (tRNAs), two ribosomal RNA genes (rRNAs), and two major non-coding regions (NCR: NC1 and NC2). The overall A + T content of the mitogenome is 73.1%, a medium content compared with all reported mitochondrial genomes of monogeneans. The mitogenome of G. pseudorasborae presents a clear bias in nucleotide composition with a negative AT skew and a positive GC skew except for NCR. All tRNAs have the typical cloverleaf secondary structure except for tRNACys, tRNASer1, and tRNASer2, which lack the dihydrouridine (DHU) arm. Furthermore, one repetitive non-coding region of 32 bp repeats occurred in the NC1 region with poly-T stretch, stem-loop structure, and TAn motif. The gene order is identical to the mitochondrial genomes reported from other Gyrodactylus species except Gyrodactylus nyanzae Paperna, 1973 and Gyrodactylus sp. FZ-2021. Phylogenetic analyses show that G. pseudorasborae and Gyrodactylus parvae You, Easy & Cone, 2008 cluster together with high nodal support based on 12 PCGs sequences and amino acid sequences, Gyrodactylidae forms independent monophyletic clade within Gyrodactylidea.ConclusionBoth the mitochondrial genome and phylogenetic analyses support G. pseudorasborae is a member of the genus Gyrodactylus and Gyrodactylidae forms an independent monophyletic clade within Gyrodactylidea. Furthermore, the mitochondrial genome of G. pseudorasborae is the shortest in the Gyrodactylidea species compared with size differences in NCR.
BackgroundThe Sec14 domain is an ancient lipid-binding domain that evolved from yeast Sec14p and performs complex lipid-mediated regulatory functions in subcellular organelles and intracellular traffic. The Sec14 family is characterized by a highly conserved Sec14 domain, and is ubiquitously expressed in all eukaryotic cells and has diverse functions. However, the number and characteristics of Sec14 homologous genes in soybean, as well as their potential roles, remain understudied.ResultsIn this study, we identified 77 Sec14 genes in the soybean genome that were unevenly distributed across 19 chromosomes. Based on the classification method used for Arabidopsis Sec14 members, GmSec14s can be categorized into three classes: GmPITP1 to GmPITP37, GmSFH1 to GmSFH25, and GmPATL1 to GmPATL15. Structural analysis of the GmSec14 genes revealed that the SFH subfamily contained more introns than the other subfamilies. A total of 10 conserved protein motifs were detected within GmSec14 proteins, with each subfamily possessing unique motifs. Two tandem duplications and 73 segmental duplications were identified among the GmSec14 genes. Additionally, a large number of cis-acting elements, particularly those related to plant hormones, were abundant in the promoter regions of the GmSec14 genes. Tissue expression analysis of the GmSec14 genes indicated that they exhibited distinct tissue-specific expression patterns. In response to salt stress, multiple genes were found to be either upregulated or downregulated. In contrast, the majority of genes were downregulated under drought stress conditions. Notably, 12 GmSec14 genes exhibited significant alterations in expression following salt or drought stress, suggesting a potential role for these genes in stress response mechanisms. Furthermore, the protein interaction network and miRNA regulation associated with GmSec14s were predicted to elucidate the potential functions of GmSec14 members.ConclusionsThis study provides a systematic and comprehensive examination of the Sec14 gene family in soybean, which will facilitate further functional research into their roles in response to salt and drought tolerance.
The family Daphniphyllaceae has a single genus, and no relevant comparative phylogenetic study has been reported on it. To explore the phylogenetic relationships and organelle evolution mechanisms of Daphniphyllaceae species, we sequenced and assembled the chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes of Daphniphyllum macropodum. We also conducted comparative analyses of organelles in Daphniphyllaceae species in terms of genome structure, phylogenetic relationships, divergence times, RNA editing events, and evolutionary rates, etc. Results indicated differences in the evolutionary patterns of the plastome and mitogenome in D. macropodum. The plastome had a more conserved structure but a faster nucleotide substitution rate, and the mitogenome showed a more complex structure while the mitotic genome shows a more complex structure but a slower nucleotide substitution rate. We identified several unidirectional protein-coding gene transfer events from the plastome to the mitogenome based on homology analysis, but no transfer events occurred from the mitogenome to the plastome. Multiple TE fragments existed in organelle genomes, and two organelles showed different preferences for nuclear TE insertion types. The estimation of divergence time indicated that the differentiation of Daphniphyllaceae and Altingiaceae at around 29.86 Mya might be due to the dramatic uplift of Tibetan Plateau during the Oligocene. About 75% of codon changes in organelles were found to be hydrophilic to hydrophobic amino acids. The RNA editing in protein-coding transcripts is the result of amino acid changes to increase their hydrophobicity and conservation in alleles, which may contribute to the formation of functional 3D structures in proteins. This study would enrich genomic resources and provide valuable insights into the structural dynamics and molecular biology of Daphniphyllaceae species.
BackgroundThe cryoinjury of semen during cryopreservation reduces sperm motility, constraining the application of artificial insemination (AI) in bovine reproduction. Some fertility markers, related to sperm motility before and after freezing have been identified. However, little is known about the biological mechanism through which freezing reduces sperm motility. This study investigated the selective effects of cryoinjury on high-motility sperm (HMS) and low-motility sperm (LMS) in frozen-thawed from the perspectives of reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), and ATP levels. The molecular mechanism of decreased sperm motility caused by cryoinjury was explored through a joint analysis of 4D-label free quantitative proteomics and non-targeted metabolomics.ResultsThe results indicate that low levels of ROS and high degrees of MMP and ATP play a critical role in the survival of HMS during the freezing process. The sperm samples from the frozen-thawed HMS and LMS were analysed for proteomics and metabolomics, 2,465 proteins and 4,135 metabolites were detected in bovine sperm samples. In contrast to LMS, HMS have 106 proteins and 106 metabolites with high abundance expression, and 79 proteins and 223 metabolites with low abundance expression. Proteomics and metabolomics data exhibit that highly expressed antioxidant enzymes and metabolites in HMS can maintain sperm motility by regulating the ROS produced during freezing to prevent sperm from oxidative stress and apoptosis. Furthermore, the KEGG analysis of differential proteins and metabolites during the freezing process implies that the significant enrichment of glycolysis and cAMP in HMS can guarantee energy supply.ConclusionsThe results provided that during the process of bovine sperm freezing, highly expressed antioxidant enzymes can regulate the reactive oxygen species levels to avoid oxidative stress and the glycolysis signalling pathway ensures ATP production can sustain frozen-thawed sperm motility.
BackgroundWRKY transcription factors (TFs) regulate plant responses to environmental stimuli and development, including flowering. Despite extensive research on different species, their role in the invasive plant Mikania micrantha remains to be explored. The aim of this study was to identify and analyze WRKY genes in M. micrantha to understand their function in flowering and adaptation mechanisms.ResultsBy analysing the whole genome of M. micrantha, a total of 77 M. micrantha WRKY (MmWRKY) genes were identified. Based on phylogenetic relationships, sequence alignment, and structural domain diversity, the MmWRKY gene family was preliminarily classified into three major groups and five subgroups: Group I, Group II (II-a, II-b, II-c, II-d, II-e), and Group III. Expression profiles showed tissue-specific expression patterns, with many WRKY genes highly expressed in flowers, indicating potential roles in floral development. Real-time quantitative PCR confirmed that the selected 11 genes were highly expressed in floral tissues, supporting their functional significance in flowering.ConclusionIn this study, 77 WRKY genes were identified in M micrantha, and their phylogenetic relationships, structural domains, and expression patterns across various tissues and organs were comprehensively analyzed. This work provides a foundation for future functional characterization of WRKY genes in M. micrantha, which may contribute to the development of more effective strategies to control its rapid spread.
Cold stress in winter is one of the most severe abiotic stresses on plant growth and flourishing, and the selection of cold tolerant genotypes is an important strategy to ensure the safety of plant growth and development. Cyclocarya paliurus, a diclinous and versatile tree species originally in subtropical regions, has been introduced and cultivated in the warm temperate zone of China to meet the increasing market demand for its leaf yield. However, information regarding its cold tolerance remains limited. Based on the ploidy identification of tested materials, an imitation experiment was conducted to investigate the variation in freezing injury index and expression of the CpaWRKY family members in diploid and tetraploid C. paliurus seedlings. The results indicated a significant difference in freezing injury index between diploids and tetraploids under the imitating temperature of southern warm temperate zone, with diploids showing better cold tolerance than the tetraploids. A total of 88 CpaWRKY genes were identified from the C. paliurus genome, and RNA-Seq results showed significant differences in WRKY gene expression in C. paliurus under cold stress. Correlation analysis between differentially expressed genes and freezing injury index suggested that CpaWRKY14, CpaWRKY26 and CpaWRKY86 play essential roles in the diploids to respond to cold stress. In contrast, the major genes involved in the cold stress response in tetraploids were CpaWRKY14, CpaWRKY60, CpaWRKY63 and CpaWRKY81. Moreover, CpaWRKY14 expression was considerably higher in diploids compared to tetraploids. The results from this study not only enhance our comprehension of the role of the CpaWRKY genes in cold stress, but also provide a foundation for the genetic improvement of C. paliurus.
BackgroundGlycyrrhiza glabra, which is widely used in medicine and therapy, is known as the 'king of traditional Chinese medicine'. In this study, we successfully assembled and annotated the mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of G. glabra via high-throughput sequencing technology, combining the advantages of short-read (Illumina) and long-read (Oxford Nanopore) sequencing.ResultsWe revealed the ring structure of the mitochondrial genome, which spans 421,293 bp with 45.1% GC content and 56 annotated genes. Notably, we identified 514 repetitive sequences, including 123 Simple sequence repeats (SRs), 3 Tndem sequence repeats (TSRs), and 388 Dispersed sequence repeats (DSRs). We identified 79 out of the 388 DSRs as potentially involved in homologous recombination. We identified five forward repeats and four palindromic repeats that facilitate homologous recombination and induce alterations in the mitochondrial genome structure. We corroborated this finding via polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Furthermore, we identified chloroplast-derived sequence fragments within the mitochondrial genome, offering novel insights into the evolutionary history of plant mitochondrial genomes. We predicted 460 potential RNA editing sites, primarily involving cytosine-to-uracil transitions. This study reveals the complexity of repetitive sequence-mediated homologous recombination in the mitochondrial genome of G. glabra and provides new insights into its structure, function, and evolution.ConclusionsThese findings have important implications for conservation biology, population genetics, and evolutionary studies, underscoring the role of repetitive sequences in genome dynamics and highlighting the need for further research on mitochondrial genome evolution and function in plants.
BackgroundTris (2-chloroethyl) phosphate (TCEP), a widely used flame retardant, is widespread in the environment and potentially harmful to organisms. However, the specific mechanisms of TCEP-induced neurological and reproductive toxicity in fish are largely unknown. Turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) is cultivated on a large scale, and the emergence of pollutants with endocrine disrupting effects seriously affects its economic benefits. This study aimed to investigate the toxic effects of TCEP on turbot by integrating physio-biochemical and transcriptomic analyses.ResultsTCEP exposure induced severe neuroendocrine disrupting effects in turbot. Firstly, the hormone levels of luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), estradiol (E2), and 11-ketotestosterone (11-KT) were significantly decreased under prolonged TCEP stress, which may have a negative impact on normal reproductive function. We identified and summarized representative differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and their functions, such as endocrine system and oxidative stress. Pathway enrichment showed that the toxicological characteristics of TCEP on turbot were neuroendocrine regulation disorders, including oxidative phosphorylation, apoptosis, steroid biosynthesis, GnRH signaling pathway and so on. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) also revealed key genes involved in these pathways. Among these genes, those encoding the components of the electron transport chain presented an initial increase in expression followed by a decrease, indicating that TCEP stress might affect mitochondrial function and lead to cell damage. This finding was also supported by the upregulation of apoptosis-related gene expression. Moreover, acute exposure to TCEP regulated MAPK-mediated transduction and regulation of GnRH signaling, thereby altering the expression of hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis-related genes.ConclusionsThese findings revealed the endocrine disrupting effects of TCEP on turbot and identified biomarkers related to reproductive toxicity, providing early warning for the monitoring of healthy aquaculture.
