Plant genomics plays a pivotal role in enhancing global food security and sustainability by offering innovative solutions for improving crop yield, disease resistance, and stress tolerance. As the number of sequenced genomes grows and the accuracy and contiguity of genome assemblies improve, structural annotation of plant genomes continues to be a significant challenge due to their large size, polyploidy, and rich repeat content. In this paper, we present an overview of the current landscape in crop genomics research, highlighting the diversity of genomic characteristics across various crop species. We also assessed the accuracy of popular gene prediction tools in identifying genes within crop genomes and examined the factors that impact their performance. Our findings highlight the strengths and limitations of BRAKER2 and Helixer as leading structural genome annotation tools and underscore the impact of genome complexity, fragmentation, and repeat content on their performance. Furthermore, we evaluated the suitability of the predicted proteins as a reliable search space in proteomics studies using mass spectrometry data. Our results provide valuable insights for future efforts to refine and advance the field of structural genome annotation.
BackgroundAssembly of metagenomic samples can provide essential information about the mobility potential and taxonomic origin of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and inform interventions to prevent further spread of resistant bacteria. However, similar to other conserved regions, such as ribosomal RNA genes and mobile genetic elements, almost identical ARGs typically occur in multiple genomic contexts across different species, representing a considerable challenge for the assembly process. Usually, this results in many fragmented contigs of unclear origin, complicating the risk assessment of ARG detections. To systematically investigate the impact of this issue on detection, quantification and contextualization of ARGs, we evaluated the performance of different assembly approaches, including genomic-, metagenomic- and transcriptomic-specialized assemblers. We quantified recovery and accuracy rates of each tool for ARGs both from in silico spiked metagenomic samples as well as real samples sequenced using both long- and short-read sequencing technologies.ResultsThe results revealed that none of the investigated tools can accurately capture genomic contexts present in samples of high complexity. The transcriptomic assembler Trinity showed a better performance in terms of reconstructing longer and fewer contigs matching unique genomic contexts, which can be beneficial for deciphering the taxonomic origin of ARGs. The currently commonly used metagenomic assembly tools metaSPAdes and MEGAHIT were able to identify the ARG repertoire but failed to fully recover the diversity of genomic contexts present in a sample. On top of that, in a complex scenario MEGAHIT produced very short contigs, which can lead to considerable underestimation of the resistome in a given sample.ConclusionsOur study shows that metaSPAdes and Trinity would be the preferable tools in terms of accuracy to recover correct genomic contexts around ARGs in metagenomic samples characterized by uneven coverages. Overall, the inability of assemblers to reconstruct long ARG-containing contigs has impacts on ARG quantification, suggesting that directly mapping reads to an ARG database should be performed as a complementary strategy to get accurate ARG abundance and diversity measures.
BackgroundThe precise mechanisms leading to the development of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) remain incompletely defined. In this study, an integrative approach utilizing untargeted proteomics and metabolomics was employed to delineate the altered proteomic and metabolomic profiles in patients with HFpEF compared to healthy controls.Materials and methodsData were collected from a prospective cohort consisting of 30 HFpEF participants and 30 healthy controls, matched by gender and age. plasma samples were analyzed by multi-omics platforms. The quantification of plasma proteins and metabolites was performed using data-independent acquisition-based liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS), respectively. Additionally, Proteomic and metabolomic results were analyzed separately and integrated using correlation and pathway analysis. This was followed by the execution of Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment studies to elucidate the biological relevance of the observed results.ResultsA total of 46 significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and 102 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) were identified. Then, GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses were performed by DEPs and DEMs. Integrated analysis of proteomics and metabolomics has revealed Tuberculosis and African trypanosomiasis pathways that are significantly enriched and the DEPs and DEMs enriched within them, are associated with inflammation and immune response.ConclusionsIntegrated proteomic and metabolomic analyses revealed distinct inflammatory and immune response pathways in HFpEF, highlighting novel therapeutic avenues.
Background Prion diseases, also known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) remain one of the deleterious disorders, which have affected several animal species. Polymorphism of the prion protein (PRNP) gene majorly determines the susceptibility of animals to TSEs. However, only limited studies have examined the variation in PRNP gene in different Nigerian livestock species. Thus, this study aimed to identify the polymorphism of PRNP gene in Nigerian livestock species (including camel, dog, horse, goat, and sheep). We sequenced the open reading frame (ORF) of 65 camels, 31 village dogs and 12 horses from Nigeria and compared with PRNP sequences of 886 individuals retrieved from public databases. Results All the 994 individuals were assigned into 162 haplotypes. The sheep had the highest number of haplotypes (n = 54), and the camel had the lowest (n = 7). Phylogenetic tree further confirmed clustering of Nigerian individuals into their various species. We detected five non-synonymous SNPs of PRNP comprising of G9A, G10A, C11G, G12C, and T669C shared by all Nigerian livestock species and were in Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE). The amino acid changes in these five non-synonymous SNP were all "benign" via Polyphen-2 program. Three SNPs G34C, T699C, and C738G occurred only in Nigerian dogs while C16G, G502A, G503A, and C681A in Nigerian horse. In addition, C50T was detected only in goats and sheep. Conclusion Our study serves as the first to simultaneously investigate the polymorphism of PRNP gene in Nigerian livestock species and provides relevant information that could be adopted in programs targeted at breeding for prion diseases resistance.
Carotenoid cleavage oxygenases (CCOs) enzymes play a vital role in plant growth and development through the synthesis of apocarotenoids and their derivative. These chemicals are necessary for flower and fruit coloration, as well as the manufacture of plant hormones such as abscisic acid (ABA) and strigolactones, which control a variety of physiological processes. The CCOs gene family has not been characterized in Arachis hypogaea. Genome mining of A. hypogaea identifies 24 AhCCO gene members. The AhCCO gene family was divided into two subgroups based on the recent study of the Arabidopsis thaliana CCO gene family classification system. Twenty-three AhCCO genes, constituting 95.8% of the total, were regulated by 29 miRNAs, underscoring the significance of microRNAs (miRNAs) in governing gene expression in peanuts. AhCCD19 is the only gene that lacks a miRNA target site. The physicochemical characteristics of CCO genes and their molecular weights and isoelectric points were studied further. The genes were then characterized regarding chromosomal distribution, structure, and promoter cis-elements. Light, stress development, drought stress, and hormone responsiveness were discovered to be associated with AhCCO genes, which can be utilized in developing more resilient crops. The investigation also showed the cellular location of the encoded proteins and discovered that the peanut carotenoid oxygenase gene family's expansion was most likely the result of tandem, segmental, and whole-genome duplication events. The localization expresses the abundance of genes mostly in the cytoplasm and chloroplast. Expression analysis shows that AhCCD7 and AhCCD14 genes show the maximum expression in the apical meristem, lateral leaf, and pentafoliate leaf development, while AhNCED9 and AhNCED13 express in response to Aspergillus flavus resistance. This knowledge throws light on the evolutionary history of the AhCCO gene family and may help researchers better understand the molecular processes behind gene duplication occurrences in plants. An integrated synteny study was used to find orthologous carotenoid oxygenase genes in A. hypogaea, whereas Arabidopsis thaliana and Beta vulgaris were used as references for the functional characterization of peanut CCO genes. These studies provide a foundation for future research on the regulation and functions of this gene family. This information provides valuable insights into the genetic regulation of AhCCO genes. This technology could create molecular markers for breeding programs to develop new peanut lines.
The Rhus gall aphid, Schlechtendalia chinensis, feeds on its primary host plant Rhus chinensis to induce galls, which have economic importance in medicines and the food industry. Rhus gall aphids have a unique life cycle and are economically beneficial but there is huge gap in genomic information about this group of aphids. Schlechtendalia chinensis induces rich-tannin galls on its host plant and is emerging as a model organism for both commercial applications and applied research in the context of gall production by insects. Here, we generated a high-quality chromosome-level assembly for the S. chinensis genome, enabling the comparison between S. chinensis and non-galling aphids. The final genome assembly is 344.59 Mb with 91.71% of the assembled sequences anchored into 13 chromosomes. We predicted 15,013 genes, of which 14,582 (97.13%) coding genes were annotated, and 99% of the predicted genes were anchored to the 13 chromosomes. This assembly reveals the endogenization of parvovirus-related DNA sequences (PRDs) in the S. chinensis genome, which could play a role in environmental adaptations. We demonstrated the characterization and classification of cytochrome P450s in the genome assembly, which are functionally crucial for sap-feeding insects and have roles in detoxification and insecticide resistance. This genome assembly also revealed the whole genome duplication events in S. chinensis, which can be considered in comparative evolutionary analysis. Our work represents a reference genome for gall-forming aphids that could be used for comparative genomic studies between galling and non-galling aphids and provides the first insight into the endogenization of PRDs in the genome of galling aphids. It also provides novel genetic information for future research on gall-formation and insect-plant interactions.
BackgroundGene duplication is a dominant mechanism for the evolution of genomes and plays a key role in genome expansion. Gene duplication via retroposition produces RNA-mediated intron-less copies called retrocopies, that may gain regulatory sequence and biological function to generate retrogenes. Retrocopies dynamics have been reported in several model insect species, but there is still a huge knowledge gap about retrocopies dynamics in most insects, and their role in adaptation.ResultsIn this study, we reported retrocopy dynamics in 40 species of insect pests of plants belonging to six insect orders. We identified a total of 9,930 retrocopies, which is so far the largest set of retrocopies identified in insects. The identified retrocopies were further grouped into 2,599 Retrogenes, 4,578 Chimeras, 1,241 Intact retrocopies, and 1,512 Pseudogene. We also analyzed all the identified retrogenes that were annotated into 506 gene families. The highest number of retrogenes annotated belong to the heat shock proteins superfamily and are present across all the 40 species from the six orders. We found a significant expansion of the heat shock protein superfamily in the studied species. Almost all the retrogenes, including those belonging to heat shock proteins, are under purifying selection. In summary, we report the retrocopies and retrogenes dynamics in a large set of insect pests of plants and the expansion of the heat shock protein family due to retroposition.ConclusionThis study unveils retrocopy dynamics in the insect pests of plants and highlights the evolution of new genes due to retroposition, and their role in important gene families' expansion.
Background Here, we investigated the underlying transcriptional-level evidence behind phytochemical differences between two metabolically extreme genotypes of Thymus daenensis. The genotypes 'Zagheh-11' (thymol/carvacrol type, poor in essential oil [EO] [2.9%] but rich in triterpenic acids) and 'Malayer-21' (thymol type and rich in EO [3.8%]) were selected from an ongoing breeding program and then clonally propagated for further experimental use. Materials and methods GC-MS, GC-FID, and HPLC-PDA were utilized to monitor the fluctuation of secondary metabolites at four phenological stages (vegetative, bud burst, early, and full-flowering stages). The highest phytochemical divergence was observed at early flowering stage. Both genotypes were subjected to mRNA sequencing (approximately 100 million paired reads) at the aforementioned stage. The expression patterns of four key genes involved in the biosynthesis of terpenoids were also validated using qRT-PCR. Results Carvacrol content in 'Zagheh-11' (26.13%) was approximately 23 times higher than 'Malayer-21' (1.12%). Reciprocally, about 10% higher thymol was found in 'Malayer-21' (62.15%). Moreover, the concentrations of three major triterpenic acids in 'Zagheh-11' were approximately as twice as those found in 'Malayer-21'. Transcriptome analysis revealed a total of 1840 unigenes that were differentially expressed, including terpene synthases, cytochrome P450, and terpenoid backbone genes. Several differentially expressed transcription factors (such as MYB, bZIP, HB-HD-ZIP, and WRKY families) were also identified. These results suggest that an active cytosolic mevalonate (MVA) pathway may be linked to higher levels of sesquiterpenes, triterpenic acids, and carvacrol in 'Zagheh-11'. The chloroplastic pathway of methyl erythritol phosphate (MEP) may have also contributed to a higher accumulation of thymol in Malayer-21. Indeed, 'Zagheh-11' showed higher expression of certain genes (HMGR, CYP71D180, beta-amyrin 28-monooxygenase, and sesquiterpene synthases) in the MVA pathway, while some genes in the MEP pathway (including DXR, ispG, and gamma-terpinene synthase) were distinctly expressed in Malayer-21. Future efforts in metabolic engineering of MVA/MEP pathways may benefit from these findings to produce increased levels of desired secondary metabolites at commercial scale.
Background Streptococcus suis (S. suis) is an important swine and human pathogen. A recent study reported the first isolate of S. suis capable of infecting fish, designated as S. suis strain 3112. The bacterium was isolated from snakeskin gourami (Trichopodus pectoralis), an economically important fish species native to Southeast Asia, and it was previously shown that it can infect and cause lethal streptococcosis in the fish. Results In this study, we present the complete genome of S. suis 3112. Molecular sequence analysis revealed that it belongs to serotype 6, sequence type 2340. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the bacterium clustered with healthy-pig S. suis isolates, suggestive of an ultimate swine (as opposed to human) origin of the bacterium. Two fluoroquinolone resistance genes are present in the bacterial genome, namely patA and patB. Our results showed that both genes are expressed in our bacterium, and the bacterium is resistant to norfloxacin, but is still sensitive to other fluoroquinolones, including ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin, and sparfloxacin. Additionally, the bacterium is sensitive to beta-lactams, tetracyclines, sulphonamides, and an aminoglycoside. Conclusions This study reports and describes the complete genome of S. suis 3112, the first isolate of S. suis known to infect fish, and provides further insights into the bacterial isolate, particularly regarding its drug resistance profile. These results will facilitate further investigations of the comparative genomics and pathogenic characteristics of S. suis, as well as the development of control strategies against this newly-identified fish pathogen.
Childhood glaucoma (CG) encompasses a heterogeneous group of genetic eye disorders that is responsible for approximately 5% of childhood blindness worldwide. Understanding the molecular aetiology is key to improving diagnosis, prognosis and unlocking the potential for optimising clinical management. In this study, we investigated 86 CG cases from 78 unrelated families of diverse ethnic backgrounds, recruited into the Genomics England 100,000 Genomes Project (GE100KGP) rare disease cohort, to improve the genetic diagnostic yield. Using the Genomics England/Genomic Medicine Centres (GE/GMC) diagnostic pipeline, 13 unrelated families were solved (13/78, 17%). Further interrogation using an expanded gene panel yielded a molecular diagnosis in 7 more unrelated families (7/78, 9%). This analysis effectively raises the total number of solved CG families in the GE100KGP to 26% (20/78 families). Twenty-five percent (5/20) of the solved families had primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), while 75% (15/20) had secondary CG; 53% of this group had non-acquired ocular anomalies (including iris hypoplasia, megalocornea, ectopia pupillae, retinal dystrophy, and refractive errors) and 47% had non-acquired systemic diseases such as cardiac abnormalities, hearing impairment, and developmental delay. CYP1B1 was the most frequently implicated gene, accounting for 55% (11/20) of the solved families. We identified two novel likely pathogenic variants in the TEK gene, in addition to one novel pathogenic copy number variant (CNV) in FOXC1. Variants that passed undetected in the GE100KGP diagnostic pipeline were likely due to limitations of the tiering process, the use of smaller gene panels during analysis, and the prioritisation of coding SNVs and indels over larger structural variants, CNVs, and non-coding variants.
Background Bats are renowned for harboring a high viral diversity, their characteristics contribute to emerging infectious diseases. However, environmental and anthropic factors also play a significant role in the emergence of zoonotic viruses. Metagenomic is an important tool for investigating the virome of bats and discovering new viruses.Results Twenty-four families of virus were detected in lung samples by sequencing and bioinfomatic analysis, the largest amount of reads was focused on the Retroviridae and contigs assembled to Desmodus rotundus endogenous retrovirus, which was feasible to acquire complete sequences. The reads were also abundant for phages.Conclusion This lung virome of D. rotundus contributes valuable information regarding the viral diversity found in bats, which is useful for understanding the drivers of viral cycles and their ecology in this species. The identification and taxonomic categorization of viruses hosted by bats carry epidemiological significance due to the potential for viral adaptation to other animals and humans, which can have severe repercussions for public health. Furthermore, the characterization of endogenized viruses helps to understanding the host genome and the evolution of the species.
The scarcity of freshwater resources resulting in a significant yield loss presents a pressing challenge in agriculture. To address this issue, utilizing abundantly available saline water could offer a smart solution. In this study, we demonstrate that the genome sequence rhizosphere bacterium Tritonibacter mobilis AK171, a halophilic marine bacterium recognized for its ability to thrive in saline and waterlogged environments, isolated from mangroves, has the remarkable ability to enable plant growth using saline irrigation. AK171 is characterized as rod-shaped cells, displays agile movement in free-living conditions, and adopts a rosette arrangement in static media. Moreover, The qualitative evaluation of PGP traits showed that AK171 could produce siderophores and IAA but could not solubilize phosphate nor produce hydrolytic enzymes it exhibits a remarkable tolerance to high temperatures and salinity. In this study, we conducted a comprehensive genome sequence analysis of T. mobilis AK171 to unravel the genetic mechanisms underlying its plant growth-promoting abilities in such challenging conditions. Our analysis revealed diverse genes and pathways involved in the bacterium's adaptation to salinity and waterlogging stress. Notably, T. mobilis AK171 exhibited a high level of tolerance to salinity and waterlogging through the activation of stress-responsive genes and the production of specific enzymes and metabolites. Additionally, we identified genes associated with biofilm formation, indicating its potential role in establishing symbiotic relationships with host plants. Furthermore, our analysis unveiled the presence of genes responsible for synthesizing antimicrobial compounds, including tropodithietic acid (TDA), which can effectively control phytopathogens. This genomic insight into T. mobilis AK171 provides valuable information for understanding the molecular basis of plant-microbial interactions in saline and waterlogged environments. It offers potential applications for sustainable agriculture in challenging conditions.
BackgroundTraditional supervised learning methods applied to DNA sequence taxonomic classification rely on the labor-intensive and time-consuming step of labelling the primary DNA sequences. Additionally, standard DNA classification/clustering methods involve time-intensive multiple sequence alignments, which impacts their applicability to large genomic datasets or distantly related organisms. These limitations indicate a need for robust, efficient, and scalable unsupervised DNA sequence clustering methods that do not depend on sequence labels or alignment.ResultsThis study proposes CGRclust, a novel combination of unsupervised twin contrastive clustering of Chaos Game Representations (CGR) of DNA sequences, with convolutional neural networks (CNNs). To the best of our knowledge, CGRclust is the first method to use unsupervised learning for image classification (herein applied to two-dimensional CGR images) for clustering datasets of DNA sequences. CGRclust overcomes the limitations of traditional sequence classification methods by leveraging unsupervised twin contrastive learning to detect distinctive sequence patterns, without requiring DNA sequence alignment or biological/taxonomic labels. CGRclust accurately clustered twenty-five diverse datasets, with sequence lengths ranging from 664 bp to 100 kbp, including mitochondrial genomes of fish, fungi, and protists, as well as viral whole genome assemblies and synthetic DNA sequences. Compared with three recent clustering methods for DNA sequences (DeLUCS, iDeLUCS, and MeShClust v3.0.), CGRclust is the only method that surpasses 81.70% accuracy across all four taxonomic levels tested for mitochondrial DNA genomes of fish. Moreover, CGRclust also consistently demonstrates superior performance across all the viral genomic datasets. The high clustering accuracy of CGRclust on these twenty-five datasets, which vary significantly in terms of sequence length, number of genomes, number of clusters, and level of taxonomy, demonstrates its robustness, scalability, and versatility.ConclusionCGRclust is a novel, scalable, alignment-free DNA sequence clustering method that uses CGR images of DNA sequences and CNNs for twin contrastive clustering of unlabelled primary DNA sequences, achieving superior or comparable accuracy and performance over current approaches. CGRclust demonstrated enhanced reliability, by consistently achieving over 80% accuracy in more than 90% of the datasets analyzed. In particular, CGRclust performed especially well in clustering viral DNA datasets, where it consistently outperformed all competing methods.
Background Trombiculid mites are globally distributed, highly diverse arachnids that largely lack molecular resources such as whole mitogenomes for the elucidation of taxonomic relationships. Trombiculid larvae (chiggers) parasitise vertebrates and can transmit bacteria (Orientia spp.) responsible for scrub typhus, a zoonotic febrile illness. Orientia tsutsugamushi causes most cases of scrub typhus and is endemic to the Asia-Pacific Region, where it is transmitted by Leptotrombidium spp. chiggers. However, in Dubai, Candidatus Orientia chuto was isolated from a case of scrub typhus and is also known to circulate among rodents in Saudi Arabia and Kenya, although its vectors remain poorly defined. In addition to Orientia, chiggers are often infected with other potential pathogens or arthropod-specific endosymbionts, but their significance for trombiculid biology and public health is unclear. Results Ten chigger species were collected from rodents in southwestern Saudi Arabia. Chiggers were pooled according to species and screened for Orientia DNA by PCR. Two species (Microtrombicula muhaylensis and Pentidionis agamae) produced positive results for the htrA gene, although Ca. Orientia chuto DNA was confirmed by Sanger sequencing only in P. agamae. Metagenomic sequencing of three pools of P. agamae provided evidence for two other bacterial associates: a spirochaete and a Wolbachia symbiont. Phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA and multi-locus sequence typing genes placed the spirochaete in a clade of micromammal-associated Borrelia spp. that are widely-distributed globally with no known vector. For the Wolbachia symbiont, a genome assembly was obtained that allowed phylogenetic localisation in a novel, divergent clade. Cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) barcodes for Saudi Arabian chiggers enabled comparisons with global chigger diversity, revealing several cases of discordance with classical taxonomy. Complete mitogenome assemblies were obtained for the three P. agamae pools and almost 50 SNPs were identified, despite a common geographic origin. Conclusions P. agamae was identified as a potential vector of Ca. Orientia chuto on the Arabian Peninsula. The detection of an unusual Borrelia sp. and a divergent Wolbachia symbiont in P. agamae indicated links with chigger microbiomes in other parts of the world, while COI barcoding and mitogenomic analyses greatly extended our understanding of inter- and intraspecific relationships in trombiculid mites.
Background Detecting very minor (< 1%) subpopulations using next-generation sequencing is a critical need for multiple applications, including the detection of drug resistant pathogens and somatic variant detection in oncology. A recently available sequencing approach termed 'sequencing by binding (SBB)' claims to have higher base calling accuracy data "out of the box." This paper evaluates the utility of using SBB for the detection of ultra-rare drug resistant subpopulations in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) using a targeted amplicon assay and compares the performance of SBB to single molecule overlapping reads (SMOR) error corrected sequencing by synthesis (SBS) data. Results SBS displayed an elevated error rate when compared to SMOR error-corrected SBS and SBB techniques. SMOR error-corrected SBS and SBB technologies performed similarly within the linear range studies and error rate studies. Conclusions With lower sequencing error rates within SBB sequencing, this technique looks promising for both targeted and unbiased whole genome sequencing, leading to the identification of minor (< 1%) subpopulations without the need for error correction methods.
Background Due to rising costs, water shortages, and labour shortages, farmers across the globe now prefer a direct seeding approach. However, submergence stress remains a major bottleneck limiting the success of this approach in rice cultivation. The merger of accumulated rice genetic resources provides an opportunity to detect key genomic loci and candidate genes that influence the flooding tolerance of rice.Results In the present study, a whole-genome meta-analysis was conducted on 120 quantitative trait loci (QTL) obtained from 16 independent QTL studies reported from 2004 to 2023. These QTL were confined to 18 meta-QTL (MQTL), and ten MQTL were successfully validated by independent genome-wide association studies from diverse natural populations. The mean confidence interval (CI) of the identified MQTL was 3.44 times narrower than the mean CI of the initial QTL. Moreover, four core MQTL loci with genetic distance less than 2 cM were obtained. By combining differentially expressed genes (DEG) from two transcriptome datasets with 858 candidate genes identified in the core MQTL regions, we found 38 common differentially expressed candidate genes (DECGs). In silico expression analysis of these DECGs led to the identification of 21 genes with high expression in embryo and coleoptile under submerged conditions. These DECGs encode proteins with known functions involved in submergence tolerance including WRKY, F-box, zinc fingers, glycosyltransferase, protein kinase, cytochrome P450, PP2C, hypoxia-responsive family, and DUF domain. By haplotype analysis, the 21 DECGs demonstrated distinct genetic differentiation and substantial genetic distance mainly between indica and japonica subspecies. Further, the MQTL7.1 was successfully validated using flanked marker S2329 on a set of genotypes with phenotypic variation.Conclusion This study provides a new perspective on understanding the genetic basis of submergence tolerance in rice. The identified MQTL and novel candidate genes lay the foundation for marker-assisted breeding/engineering of flooding-tolerant cultivars conducive to direct seeding.
BackgroundPhylogenetic gaps of public databases of reference sequences are a major obstacle for comparative genomics and management of marine resources, particularly in the Global South, where economically important fisheries and conservation flagship species often lack closely-related references. We applied target-enrichment to obtain complete mitochondrial genomes of marine ichthyofauna from the Brazilian coast selected based on economic significance, conservation status and lack of phylogenetically-close references. These included sardines (Dorosomatidae, Alosidae), mackerels (Scombridae) croakers (Sciaenidae), groupers (Epinephelidae) and snappers (Lutjanidae).ResultsCustom baits were designed to enrich mitochondrial DNA across a broad phylogenetic range of fishes. Sequencing generated approximately 100k reads per sample, which were assembled in a total of 70 complete mitochondrial genomes and include fifty-two new additions to GenBank, including five species with no previous mitochondrial data. Departures from the typical gene content and order occurred in only three taxa and mostly involved tRNA gene duplications. Start-codons for all genes, except Cytochrome C Oxidase subunit I (COI), were consistently ATG, whilst a wide range of stop-codons deviated from the prevailing TAA. Phylogenetic analysis confirmed assembly accuracy and revealed signs of cryptic diversification within the Mullus genus. Lineage delimitation methods using Sardinella aurita and S. brasiliensis mitochondrial genomes support a single Operational Taxonomic Unit.ConclusionsTarget enrichment was highly efficient, providing complete novel mitochondrial genomes with little sequencing effort. These sequences are deposited in public databases to enable subsequent studies in population genetics and adaptation of Latin American fish species and serve as a vital resource for conservation and management programs that rely on molecular data for species and genus-level identification.
Background Helicobacter pylori infects the stomach and/or small intestines in more than half of the human population. Infection with H. pylori is the most common cause of chronic gastritis, which can lead to more severe gastroduodenal pathologies such as peptic ulcer, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma, and gastric cancer. H. pylori infection is particularly concerning in Colombia in South America, where > 80% of the population is estimated to be infected with H. pylori and the rate of stomach cancer is one of the highest in the continent. Results We compared the antimicrobial susceptibility profiles and short-read genome sequences of five H. pylori isolates obtained from patients diagnosed with gastritis of varying severity (chronic gastritis, antral erosive gastritis, superficial gastritis) in Pereira, Colombia sampled in 2015. Antimicrobial susceptibility tests revealed the isolates to be resistant to at least one of the five antimicrobials tested: four isolates were resistant to metronidazole, two to clarithromycin, two to levofloxacin, and one to rifampin. All isolates were susceptible to tetracycline and amoxicillin. Comparative genome analyses revealed the presence of genes associated with efflux pump, restriction modification systems, phages and insertion sequences, and virulence genes including the cytotoxin genes cagA and vacA. The five genomes represent three novel sequence types. In the context of the Colombian and global populations, the five H. pylori isolates from Pereira were phylogenetically distant to each other but were closely related to other lineages circulating in the country. Conclusions H. pylori from gastritis of different severity varied in their antimicrobial susceptibility profiles and genome content. This knowledge will be useful in implementing appropriate eradication treatment regimens for specific types of gastritis. Understanding the genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in H. pylori across the geographical landscape is critical in informing health policies for effective disease prevention and management that is most effective at local and country-wide scales. This is especially important in Colombia and other South American countries that are poorly represented in global genomic surveillance studies of bacterial pathogens.
Background The severity of COVID-19 is influenced by various factors including the presence of respiratory diseases. Studies have indicated a potential relationship between asthma and COVID-19 severity.Objective This study aimed to conduct a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify genetic and clinical variants associated with the severity of COVID-19, both among patients with and without asthma.Methods We analyzed data from 2131 samples sourced from the Biobanque qu & eacute;b & eacute;coise de la COVID-19 (BQC19), with 1499 samples from patients who tested positive for COVID-19. Among these, 1110 exhibited mild-to-moderate symptoms, 389 had severe symptoms, and 58 had asthma. We conducted a comparative analysis of clinical data from individuals in these three groups and GWAS using a logistic regression model. Phenotypic data analysis resulted in the refined covariates integrated into logistic models for genetic studies.Results Considering a significance threshold of 1 x 10-6, seven genetic variants were associated with severe COVID-19. These variants were located proximal to five genes: sodium voltage-gated channel alpha subunit 1 (SCN10A), desmoplakin (DSP), RP1 axonemal microtubule associated (RP1), IGF like family member 1 (IGFL1), and docking protein 5 (DOK5). The GWAS comparing individuals with severe COVID-19 with asthma to those without asthma revealed four genetic variants in transmembrane protein with EGF like and two follistatin like domains 2 (TMEFF2) and huntingtin interacting protein-1 (HIP1) genes.Conclusion This study provides significant insights into the genetic profiles of patients with severe forms of the disease, whether accompanied by asthma or not. These findings enhance our comprehension of the genetic factors that affect COVID-19 severity.Key messages Seven genetic variants were associated with the severe form of COVID-19; Four genetic variants were associated with the severe form of COVID-19 in individuals with comorbid asthma; These findings help define the genetic component of the severe form of COVID-19 in relation to asthma as a comorbidity.
Background Admixture occurs between different ethnic human populations. The global colonization in recent centuries by Europeans led to the most significant admixture in human history. While admixture may enhance genetic diversity for better fitness, it may also impact on human health by transmitting genetic variants for disease susceptibility in the admixture population. The admixture by Portuguese global exploration initiated in the 15th century has reached over 20 million of Portuguese-heritage population worldwide. It provides a valuable model to study the impact of admixture on human health. BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA) are two of the important tumor suppressor genes. The pathogenic variation (PV) in BRCA is well determined to cause high risk of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer. Tracing the distribution of Portuguese BRCA PV in Portuguese-heritage population will help to understand the impact of admixture on cancer susceptibility in modern humans. In this study, we analyzed the distribution of the Portuguese-originated BRCA variation in Brazilian population, which has high degree Portuguese-heritage. Methods By comprehensive data mining, standardization and annotation, we generated a Portuguese-derived BRCA variation dataset and a Brazilian-derived BRCA variation dataset. We compared the two BRCA variation datasets to identify the BRCA variants shared between the two populations. Results The Portuguese-derived BRCA variation dataset consists of 220 BRCA variants including 78 PVs from 11,482 Portuguese cancer patients, 93 (42.2%) in BRCA1 and 127 (57.7%) in BRCA2. Of the 556 Portuguese BRCA PV carriers carrying the 78 PVs, 331 (59.5%) carried the three Portuguese-BRCA founder PVs of BRCA1 c.2037delinsCC, BRCA1 c.3331_3334del and BRCA2 c.156_157insAlu. The Brazilian-derived BRCA variation dataset consists of 255 BRCA PVs from 7,711 cancer patients, 136 (53.3%) in BRCA1 and 119 (46.6%) in BRCA2. We developed an open database named dbBRCA-Portuguese (https://genemutation.fhs.um.edu.mo/dbbrca-portuguese/) and an open database named dbBRCA-Brazilian (https://genemutation.fhs.um.edu.mo/dbbrca-brazilian) to host the BRCA variation data from Portuguese and Brazilian populations. We compared the BRCA PV datasets between Portuguese and Brazilian populations, and identified 29 Portuguese-specific BRCA PVs shared between Portuguese and Brazilian populations, 14 in BRCA1 including the Portuguese founder BRCA1 c.3331_3334del and BRCA1 c.2037delinsCC, and 15 in BRCA2 including the Portuguese founder BRCA2 c.156_157insAlu. Searching the 78 Portuguese BRCA PVs in over 5,000 ancient human genomes identified evolution origin for only 8 PVs in Europeans dated between 37,470 and 3,818 years before present, confirming the Portuguese-specificity of Portuguese BRCA PVs; comparing the 78 Portuguese BRCA PVs Portuguese, 255 Brazilian BRCA PVs, and 134 African BRCA PVs showed little overlapping, ruling out the possibility that the BRCA PVs shared between Portuguese and Brazilian may also be contributed by African. Conclusion Our study provides evidence that the admixture in recent human history contributed to cancer susceptibility in modern humans.
The recent emergence of Elizabethkingia anophelis as a human pathogen is a major concern for global public health. This organism has the potential to cause severe infections and has inherent antimicrobial resistance. The potential for widespread outbreaks and rapid global spread highlights the critical importance of understanding the biology and transmission dynamics of this infectious agent. We performed a large-scale analysis of available 540 E. anophelis, including one novel strain isolated from raw milk and sequenced in this study. Pan-genome analysis revealed an open and diverse pan-genome in this species, characterized by the presence of many accessory genes. This suggests that the species has a high level of adaptability and can thrive in a variety of environments. Phylogenetic analysis has also revealed a complex population structure, with limited source-lineage correlation. We identified diverse antimicrobial resistance factors, including core-genome and accessory ones often associated with mobile genetic elements within specific lineages. Mobilome analysis revealed a dynamic landscape primarily composed of genetic islands, integrative and conjugative elements, prophage elements, and small portion of plasmids emphasizing a complex mechanism of horizontal gene transfer. Our study underscores the adaptability of E. anophelis, characterized by a diverse range of antimicrobial resistance genes, putative virulence factors, and genes enhancing fitness. This adaptability is also supported by the organism's ability to acquire genetic material through horizontal gene transfer, primarily facilitated by mobile genetic elements such as integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs). The potential for rapid evolution of this emerging pathogen poses a significant challenge to public health efforts.
BackgroundThe use of microsporidia as a disease-transmission-blocking tool has garnered significant attention. Microsporidia sp. MB, known for its ability to block malaria development in mosquitoes, is an optimal candidate for supplementing malaria vector control methods. This symbiont, found in Anopheles mosquitoes, can be transmitted both vertically and horizontally with minimal effects on its mosquito host. Its genome, recently sequenced from An. arabiensis, comprises a compact 5.9 Mbp.ResultsHere, we analyze the Microsporidia sp. MB genome, highlighting its major genomic features, gene content, and protein function. The genome contains 2247 genes, predominantly encoding enzymes. Unlike other members of the Enterocytozoonida group, Microsporidia sp. MB has retained most of the genes in the glycolytic pathway. Genes involved in RNA interference (RNAi) were also identified, suggesting a mechanism for host immune suppression. Importantly, meiosis-related genes (MRG) were detected, indicating potential for sexual reproduction in this organism. Comparative analyses revealed similarities with its closest relative, Vittaforma corneae, despite key differences in host interactions.ConclusionThis study provides an in-depth analysis of the newly sequenced Microsporidia sp. MB genome, uncovering its unique adaptations for intracellular parasitism, including retention of essential metabolic pathways and RNAi machinery. The identification of MRGs suggests the possibility of sexual reproduction, offering insights into the symbiont's evolutionary strategies. Establishing a reference genome for Microsporidia sp. MB sets the foundation for future studies on its role in malaria transmission dynamics and host-parasite interactions.
Background The Portuguese oyster Crassostrea angulata, a bivalve of significant economic and ecological importance, has faced a decline in both production and natural populations due to pathologies, climate change, and anthropogenic factors. To safeguard its genetic diversity and improve reproductive management, cryopreservation emerges as a valuable strategy. However, the cryopreservation methodologies lead to some damage in structures and functions of the cells and tissues that can affect post-thaw quality. Transcriptomics may help to understand the molecular consequences related to cryopreservation steps and therefore to identify different freezability biomarkers. This study investigates the molecular damage induced by cryopreservation in C. angulata D-larvae, focusing on two critical steps: exposure to cryoprotectant solution and the freezing/thawing process. Results Expression analysis revealed 3 differentially expressed genes between larvae exposed to cryoprotectant solution and fresh larvae and 611 differentially expressed genes in cryopreserved larvae against fresh larvae. The most significantly enriched gene ontology terms were "carbohydrate metabolic process", "integral component of membrane" and "chitin binding" for biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions, respectively. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analysis identified the "neuroactive ligand receptor interaction", "endocytosis" and "spliceosome" as the most enriched pathways. RNA sequencing results were validate by quantitative RT-PCR, once both techniques presented the same gene expression tendency and a group of 11 genes were considered important molecular biomarkers to be used in further studies for the evaluation of cryodamage. Conclusions The current work provided valuable insights into the molecular repercussions of cryopreservation on D-larvae of Crassostrea angulata, revealing that the freezing process had a more pronounced impact on larval quality compared to any potential cryoprotectant-induced toxicity. Additionally, was identify 11 genes serving as biomarkers of freezability for D-larvae quality assessment. This research contributes to the development of more effective cryopreservation protocols and detection methods for cryodamage in this species.
In plants, the BAX inhibitor-1 (BI-1) gene plays a crucial part in controlling cell death under stress conditions. This mechanism of Programmed Cell Death (PCD) is genetically regulated and is crucial for the elimination of unwanted or damaged cells in a controlled manner, which is essential for normal development and tissue maintenance. A study on cucumber identified and characterized five BI-1 genes: CsBI1, CsBI2, CsBI3, CsBI4, and CsBI5. These genes share conserved domains, indicating common evolutionary history and function. Physicochemical analysis revealed their molecular weights and isoelectric points, while subcellular localization showed their presence in different cellular compartments. The phylogenetic analysis highlighted evolutionary relationships with related crops. Chromosomal distribution and synteny analysis suggested segmental or tandem duplications within the gene family. Protein-protein interaction analysis revealed extensive interactions with other cucumber proteins. Cis-regulatory elements in the promoter regions provided insights into potential functions and transcriptional regulation. miRNAs showed diverse regulatory mechanisms, including mRNA cleavage and translational inhibition. The CsBI3, CsBI4 and CsBI5 genes exhibit elevated expression levels during cold stress, suggesting their vital involvement in cucumber plant defense mechanisms. The application of chitosan oligosaccharides externally confirms their distinct expression patterns. The qRT-PCR confirms the upregulation of CsBI genes in ToLCNDV-infected plants, indicating their potential to mitigate biotic and abiotic stresses. The comprehensive genome-wide exploration provides opportunities for the development of cold-tolerant and virus-resistant cucumber variants by traditional breeding or gene.
Background The highly eusocial stingless bees are crucial pollinators of native and agricultural ecosystems. Nevertheless, genomic studies within this bee tribe remain scarce. We present the genome assembly of the stingless bee Melipona bicolor. This bee is a remarkable exception to the typical single-queen colony structure, since in this species, multiple queens may coexist and share reproductive duties, resulting in genetically diverse colonies with weak kinship connections. As the only known genuinely polygynous bee, M. bicolor's genome provides a valuable resource for investigating sociality beyond kin selection. Results The genome was assembled employing a hybrid approach combining short and long reads, resulting in 241 contigs spanning 259 Mb (N50 of 6.2 Mb and 97.5% complete BUSCOs). Comparative analyses shed light on some evolutionary aspects of stingless bee genomics, including multiple chromosomal rearrangements in Melipona. Additionally, we explored the evolution of venom genes in M. bicolor and other stingless bees, revealing that, apart from two genes, the conserved repertoire of venom components remains under purifying selection in this clade. Conclusion This study advances our understanding of stingless bee genomics, contributing to the conservation efforts of these vital pollinators and offering insights into the evolutionary mechanisms driving their unique adaptations.
Background The identification of low-frequency haplotypes, never observed in homozygous state in a population, is considered informative on the presence of potentially harmful alleles (candidate alleles), putatively involved in inbreeding depression. Although identification of candidate alleles is challenging, studies analyzing the dynamics of potentially harmful alleles are lacking. A pedigree of the highly endangered Gochu Asturcelta pig breed, including 471 individuals belonging to 51 different families with at least 5 offspring each, was genotyped using the Axiom PigHDv1 Array (658,692 SNPs). Analyses were carried out on four different cohorts defined according to pedigree depth and at the whole population (WP) level.Results The 4,470 Linkage Blocks (LB) identified in the Base Population (10 individuals), gathered a total of 16,981 alleles in the WP. Up to 5,466 (32%) haplotypes were statistically considered candidate alleles, 3,995 of them (73%) having one copy only. The number of alleles and candidate alleles varied across cohorts according to sample size. Up to 4,610 of the alleles identified in the WP (27% of the total) were present in one cohort only. Parentage analysis identified a total of 67,742 parent-offspring incompatibilities. The number of mismatches varied according to family size. Parent-offspring inconsistencies were identified in 98.2% of the candidate alleles and 100% of the LB in which they were located. Segregation analyses informed that most potential candidate alleles appeared de novo in the pedigree. Only 17 candidate alleles were identified in the boar, sow, and paternal and maternal grandparents and were considered segregants.Conclusions Our results suggest that neither mutation nor recombination are the major forces causing the apparition of candidate alleles. Their occurrence is more likely caused by Allele-Drop-In events due to SNP calling errors. New alleles appear when wrongly called SNPs are used to construct haplotypes. The presence of candidate alleles in either parents or grandparents of the carrier individuals does not ensure that they are true alleles. Minimum Allele Frequency thresholds may remove informative alleles. Only fully segregant candidate alleles should be considered potentially harmful alleles. A set of 16 candidate genes, potentially involved in inbreeding depression, is described.
Gene-edited mosquitoes lacking a gamma-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiol reductase-like protein, namely (mosGILT(null)) have lower Plasmodium infection, which is linked to impaired ovarian development and immune activation. The transcriptome of mosGILT(null) Anopheles gambiae was therefore compared to wild type (WT) mosquitoes by RNA-sequencing to delineate mosGILT-dependent pathways. Compared to WT mosquitoes, mosGILT(null) A. gambiae demonstrated altered expression of genes related to oogenesis, 20-hydroxyecdysone synthesis, as well as immune-related genes. Serendipitously, the zero population growth gene, zpg, an essential regulator of germ cell development was found to be one of the most downregulated genes in mosGILT(null) mosquitoes. These results provide a crucial missing link between two previous studies on the role of zpg and mosGILT in ovarian development. This study further demonstrates that mosGILT has the potential to serve as a target for the biological control of mosquito vectors and to influence the Plasmodium life cycle within the vector.
In the rapidly expanding domain of scientific research, tracking and synthesizing information from the rapidly increasing volume of publications pose significant challenges. To address this, we introduce a novel high-throughput pipeline that employs ChatGPT to systematically extract and analyze connectivity information from the full-texts and abstracts of 24,237 and 150,538 research publications concerning Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster, respectively. This approach has effectively identified 200,219 and 1,194,587 interactions within the C. elegans and Drosophila biomaps, respectively. Utilizing Cytoscape Web, we have developed a searchable online biomaps that link relevant keywords to their corresponding PubMed IDs, thus providing seamless access to an extensive knowledge network encompassing C. elegans and Drosophila. Our work highlights the transformative potential of integrating artificial intelligence with bioinformatics to deepen our understanding of complex biological systems. By revealing the intricate web of relationships among key entities in C. elegans and Drosophila, we offer invaluable insights that promise to propel advancements in genetics, developmental biology, neuroscience, longevity, and beyond. We also provide details and discuss significant nodes within both biomaps, including the insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) and the notch pathways. Our innovative methodology sets a robust foundation for future research aimed at unravelling complex biological networks across diverse organisms. The two databases are available at worm.bio-map.com and drosophila.bio-map.com.
Background Oculocutaneous albinism type1 (OCA1) is caused by the TYR gene's homozygous and compound heterozygous variants. TKFC gene variants cause triokinase & FMN cyclase deficiency syndrome with variable multisystemic disorders. Objectives To determine the potential disease-causing variants in two deceased patients presenting atypical OCA1 features by demonstrating three generations for a single family. The two deceased neonates had severe skeletal abnormalities and fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We also explored the potential mechanisms for the causative relationship between TKFC and multisystem disorders. Patients and methodsDue to the new emerging symptoms that weren't reported before with the TYR gene, the following methods were performed: Sanger sequencing for the TYR gene, followed by whole exome sequencing, co-segregation, and computational analyses. Results Extensive parental consanguinity was found, and consequently an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance was prioritized. Upon performing sequencing and segregation data, the following has been confirmed: positive co-segregation of nonsense homozygous NM_000372.5:c.346C > T p.(Arg116*) variant in TYR gene and multisystem disease-missense homozygous NM_015533.4:c.598G > A p.(Val200Ile) variant in TKFC gene in the two affected index patients who deceased due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Using computational analysis, we found that c.598G > A p.(Val200Ile) pathogenicity has led to the failure of L2-K1 active site closure due to the potential differential fluctuation between valine and isoleucine residues. Subsequently, disruption of endogenous DHA phosphorylation was found. Two potential mechanisms exploring the causative relationship between TKFC gene and multisystem disorders have been suggested. Conclusions This study presented a first family with the co-existence of biallelic variants in TYR and TKFC genes associating severe skeletal abnormalities and lethal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Neither of these genes would have been pursued in the standard genetic counseling. Such discovery is paving the way for more efficient genetic counseling. Comparing TKFC results with literature data showed that our relevant expanded TKFC variant is the 3rd worldwide.
Background The auxin/indole-3-acetic acid (Aux/IAA) gene family is a crucial element of the auxin signaling pathway, significantly influencing plant growth and development. Hence, we conducted a comprehensive investigation of Aux/IAAs gene family using the Sp75 and Monoe-Viroflay genomes in spinach. Results A total of 24 definitive Aux/IAA genes were identified, exhibiting diverse attributes in terms of amino acid length, molecular weight, and isoelectric points. This diversity underscores potential specific roles within the family, such as growth regulation and stress response. Structural analysis revealed significant variations in gene length and molecular weight. These variations indicate distinct roles within the Aux/IAA gene family. Chromosomal distribution analysis exhibited a dispersed pattern, with chromosomes 4 and 1 hosting the highest and lowest numbers of Aux/IAA genes, respectively. Phylogenetic analysis grouped the identified genes into distinct clades, revealing potential evolutionary relationships. Notably, the phylogenetic tree highlighted specific gene clusters suggesting shared genetic ancestry and potential functional synergies within spinach. Expression analysis under NAA treatment unveiled gene-specific and time-dependent responses, with certain genes exhibiting distinct temporal expression patterns. Specifically, SpoIAA5 displayed a substantial increase at 2 h post-NAA treatment, while SpoIAA7 and SpoIAA9 demonstrated continuous rises, peaking at the 4-hour time point. Conclusions These observations indicate a complex interplay of gene-specific and temporal regulation in response to auxin. Moreover, the comparison with other plant species emphasized both shared characteristics and unique features in Aux/IAA gene numbers, providing insights into the evolutionary dynamics of this gene family. This comprehensive characterization of Aux/IAA genes in spinach not only establishes the foundation for understanding their specific functions in spinach development but also provides a valuable resource for experimental validation and further exploration of their roles in the intricate network of auxin signaling pathways.
BackgroundSolving the structure of mRNA transcripts is a major challenge for both research and molecular diagnostic purposes. Current approaches based on short-read RNA sequencing and RT-PCR techniques cannot fully explore the complexity of transcript structure. The emergence of third-generation long-read sequencing addresses this problem by solving this sequence directly. However, genes with low expression levels are difficult to study with the whole transcriptome sequencing approach. To fix this technical limitation, we propose a novel method to capture transcripts of a gene panel using a targeted enrichment approach suitable for Pacific Biosciences and Oxford Nanopore Technologies platforms.ResultsWe designed a set of probes to capture transcripts of a panel of genes involved in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome. We present SOSTAR (iSofOrmS annoTAtoR), a versatile pipeline to assemble, quantify and annotate isoforms from long read sequencing using a new tool specially designed for this application. The significant enrichment of transcripts by our capture protocol, together with the SOSTAR annotation, allowed the identification of 1,231 unique transcripts within the gene panel from the eight patients sequenced. The structure of these transcripts was annotated with a resolution of one base relative to a reference transcript. All major alternative splicing events of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes described in the literature were found. Complex splicing events such as pseudoexons were correctly annotated. SOSTAR enabled the identification of abnormal transcripts in the positive controls. In addition, a case of unexplained inheritance in a family with a history of breast and ovarian cancer was solved by identifying an SVA retrotransposon in intron 13 of the BRCA1 gene.ConclusionsWe have validated a new protocol for the enrichment of transcripts of interest using probes adapted to the ONT and PacBio platforms. This protocol allows a complete description of the alternative structures of transcripts, the estimation of their expression and the identification of aberrant transcripts in a single experiment. This proof-of-concept opens new possibilities for RNA structure exploration in both research and molecular diagnostics.
BackgroundTranscription factors (TFs) bind to different parts of the genome in different types of cells, but it is usually assumed that the inherent DNA-binding preferences of a TF are invariant to cell type. Yet, there are several known examples of TFs that switch their DNA-binding preferences in different cell types, and yet more examples of other mechanisms, such as steric hindrance or cooperative binding, that may result in a "DNA signature" of differential binding.ResultsTo survey this phenomenon systematically, we developed a deep learning method we call SigTFB (Signatures of TF Binding) to detect and quantify cell-type specificity in a TF's known genomic binding sites. We used ENCODE ChIP-seq data to conduct a wide scale investigation of 169 distinct TFs in up to 14 distinct cell types. SigTFB detected statistically significant DNA binding signatures in approximately two-thirds of TFs, far more than might have been expected from the relatively sparse evidence in prior literature. We found that the presence or absence of a cell-type specific DNA binding signature is distinct from, and indeed largely uncorrelated to, the degree of overlap between ChIP-seq peaks in different cell types, and tended to arise by two mechanisms: using established motifs in different frequencies, and by selective inclusion of motifs for distint TFs.ConclusionsWhile recent results have highlighted cell state features such as chromatin accessibility and gene expression in predicting TF binding, our results emphasize that, for some TFs, the DNA sequences of the binding sites contain substantial cell-type specific motifs.
BackgroundDarjeeling tea is a globally renowned beverage, which faces numerous obstacles in sexual reproduction, such as self-incompatibility, poor seed germination, and viability, as well as issues with vegetative propagation. Somatic embryogenesis (SE) is a valuable method for rapid clonal propagation of Darjeeling tea. However, the metabolic regulatory mechanisms underlying SE in Darjeeling tea remain largely unknown. To address this, we conducted an integrated metabolomics and transcriptomics analysis of embryogenic callus (EC), globular embryo (GE), and heart-shaped embryo (HE).ResultsThe integrated analyses showed that various genes and metabolites involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway, auxin biosynthesis pathway, gibberellin, brassinosteroid and amino acids biosynthesis pathways were differentially enriched in EC, GE, and HE. Our results revealed that despite highly up-regulated auxin biosynthesis genes YUC1, TAR1 and AAO1 in EC, endogenous indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) was significantly lower in EC than GE and HE. However, bioactive Gibberellin A4 displayed higher accumulation in EC. We also found higher BABY BOOM (BBM) and Leafy cotyledon1 (LEC1) gene expression in GE along with high accumulation of castasterone, a brassinosteroid. Total flavonoids and phenolics levels were elevated in GE and HE compared to EC, especially the phenolic compound chlorogenic acid was highly accumulated in GE.ConclusionsIntegrated metabolome and transcriptome analysis revealed enriched metabolic pathways, including auxin biosynthesis and signal transduction, brassinosteroid, gibberellin, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, amino acids metabolism, and transcription factors (TFs) during SE in Darjeeling tea. Notably, EC displayed lower endogenous IAA levels, conducive to maintaining differentiation, while higher IAA concentration in GE and HE was crucial for preserving embryo identity. Additionally, a negative correlation between bioactive gibberellin A4 (GA4) and IAA was observed, impacting callus growth in EC. The high accumulation of chlorogenic acid, a phenolic compound, might contribute to the low success rate in GE and HE formation in Darjeeling tea. TFs such as BBM1, LEC1, FUS3, LEA, WOX3, and WOX11 appeared to regulate gene expression, influencing SE in Darjeeling tea.
BackgroundGenomic structural variations (GSVs), notably copy number variations (CNVs), significantly shape genetic diversity and facilitate adaptation in cattle populations. Despite their importance, the genome-wide characterization of CNVs in indigenous Ethiopian cattle breeds-Abigar, Fellata, and Gojjam-Highland remains largely unexplored. In this study, we applied a read-depth approach to whole genome sequencing (WGS) data to conduct the first comprehensive analysis of CNVs in these populations.ResultsWe identified 3,893 CNV regions (CNVRs) covering 19.15 Mb (0.71% of the cattle genome). These CNVRs ranged from 1.60 kb to 488.0 kb, with an average size of 4.92 kb. These CNVRs included deletions (1713), duplications (1929), and mixed events (251) showing notable differences in distribution among the breeds. Four out of five randomly selected CNVRs were successfully validated using real time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Further analyses identified candidate genes associated with high-altitude adaptation (GBE1 and SOD1), heat stress adaptation (HSPA13, DNAJC18, and DNAJC8) and resistance to tick infestations (BoLA and KRT33A). In addition, variance stabilizing transformation (VST) statistics highlighted population-specific CNVRs, emphasizing the unique genetic signatures of high-altitude adaptation in the Gojjam-Highland cattle breed. Among the detected CNVRs, 4.93% (192 out of 3,893) overlapped with 520 quantitative traits loci (QTLs) associated with six economically important trait categories suggesting that these CNVRs may significantly contribute to the genetic variation underlying these traits.ConclusionsOur comprehensive analysis reveals significant CNVRs associated with key adaptive traits in Ethiopian cattle breeds highlighting their genetic diversity and resilience. These findings offer valuable insights into the genetic basis of adaptability and can inform sustainable breeding practices and conservation efforts. Future research should prioritize the functional validation of these CNVRs and their integration into breeding programs to enhance traits such as disease resistance and environmental adaptability.
Background The Peruvian 'chanque' or Chilean 'loco' Concholepas concholepas is an economically, ecologically, and culturally important muricid gastropod heavily exploited by artisanal fisheries in the temperate southeastern Pacific Ocean. In this study, we have profited from a set of bioinformatics tools to recover important biological information of C. concholepas from low-coverage short-read NGS datasets. Specifically, we calculated the size of the nuclear genome, ploidy, and estimated transposable elements content using an in silico k-mer approach, we discovered, annotated, and quantified those transposable elements, we assembled and annotated the 45S rDNA RNA operon and mitochondrial genome, and we confirmed the phylogenetic position of C. concholepas within the muricid subfamily Rapaninae based on translated protein coding genes.Results Using a k-mer approach, the haploid genome size estimated for the predicted diploid genome of C. concholepas varied between 1.83 Gbp (with kmer = 24) and 2.32 Gbp (with kmer = 36). Between half and two thirds of the nuclear genome of C. concholepas was composed of transposable elements. The most common transposable elements were classified as Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements and Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements, which were more abundant than DNA transposons, simple repeats, and Long Terminal Repeats. Less abundant repeat elements included Helitron mobile elements, 45S rRNA DNA, and Satellite DNA, among a few others.The 45S rRNA DNA operon of C. concholepas that encodes for the ssrRNA, 5.8S rRNA, and lsrRNA genes was assembled into a single contig 8,090 bp long. The assembled mitochondrial genome of C. concholepas is 15,449 bp long and encodes 13 protein coding genes, two ribosomal genes, and 22 transfer RNAs.Conclusion The information gained by this study will inform the assembly of a high quality nuclear genome for C. concholepas and will support bioprospecting and biomonitoring using environmental DNA to advance development of conservation and management plans in this overexploited marine snail.
Background Plant specialized (or secondary) metabolites (PSM), also known as phytochemicals, natural products, or plant constituents, play essential roles in interactions between plants and environment. Although many research efforts have focused on discovering novel metabolites and their biosynthetic genes, the resolution of metabolic pathways and identified biosynthetic genes was limited by rudimentary analysis approaches and enormous number of candidate genes.Results Here we integrated state-of-the-art automated machine learning (ML) frame AutoGluon-Tabular and multi-omics data from Arabidopsis to predict genes encoding enzymes involved in biosynthesis of plant specialized metabolite (PSM), focusing on the three main PSM categories: terpenoids, alkaloids, and phenolics. We found that the related features of genomics and proteomics were the top two crucial categories of features contributing to the model performance. Using only these key features, we built a new model in Arabidopsis, which performed better than models built with more features including those related with transcriptomics and epigenomics. Finally, the built models were validated in maize and tomato, and models tested for maize and trained with data from two other species exhibited either equivalent or superior performance to intraspecies predictions.Conclusions Our external validation results in grape and poppy on the one hand implied the applicability of our model to the other species, and on the other hand showed enormous potential to improve the prediction of enzymes synthesizing PSM with the inclusion of valid data from a wider range of species.
Mangiferin, a C-glucosyl xanthone, is a biologically active glycoside naturally synthesized in mango. Glycosyltransferase can catalyze the biosynthesis of mangiferin. In this study, we identified 221 members of the UGT glycosyltransferase family in mango. The 221 MiUGT genes were grouped into 13 subfamilies through phylogenetic tree analysis with Arabidopsis, Chinese bayberry, and mango. All UGT family members in mango were unevenly distributed on 17 chromosomes and found that tandem duplication dominated the expansion of UGT family members in mango. Purification selection primarily influenced the evolution of the mango UGT family members. In addition, cis-element analysis of the mango UGT gene family revealed the presence of MYB binding sites, which are involved in flavonoid biosynthesis; which further supports the role of UGT family members in the synthesis of flavonoids. To verify these results, we analyzed the expression of UGT family members in mango leaves, stems, and different developmental stages of fruit peel. The RNA-seq and qRT-PCR results showed significant differences in the expression patterns of MiUGT genes in various tissues and developmental stages of mango. We identified MiUGT gene-specific expression at different stages of fruit development. These results lay a theoretical foundation for research on the relationship between members of the mango UGT family and the synthesis of flavonoids, mangiferin.
BackgroundGene set tests can pinpoint genes and biological pathways that exert small to moderate effects on complex diseases like Type 2 Diabetes (T2D). By aggregating genetic markers based on biological information, these tests can enhance the statistical power needed to detect genetic associations.ResultsOur goal was to develop a gene set test utilizing Bayesian Linear Regression (BLR) models, which account for both linkage disequilibrium (LD) and the complex genetic architectures intrinsic to diseases, thereby increasing the detection power of genetic associations. Through a series of simulation studies, we demonstrated how the efficacy of BLR derived gene set tests is influenced by several factors, including the proportion of causal markers, the size of gene sets, the percentage of genetic variance explained by the gene set, and the genetic architecture of the traits. By using KEGG pathways, eQTLs, and regulatory elements as different kinds of gene sets with T2D results, we also assessed the performance of gene set tests in explaining more about real phenotypes.ConclusionsComparing our method with other approaches, such as the gold standard MAGMA (Multi-marker Analysis of Genomic Annotation) approach, our BLR gene set test showed superior performance. Combining performance of our method in simulated and real phenotypes, this suggests that our BLR-based approach could more accurately identify genes and biological pathways underlying complex diseases.
BackgroundLocust outbreaks cause devastation and provide material for fundamental research. They associate with a case of phenotypic plasticity whereby the shift between the two extremes of the polyphenism (i.e., gregarious phase versus solitarious phase) affects behaviour as well as most aspects of the locusts' biology. The phenotypic changes imply changes in gene expression, the changes in behaviour characterize the locusts' phase change, and the changes in the Central Nervous System (CNS) control the changes in behaviour. Thus, understanding and tackling the phenomenon requires studying the gene expression changes that the locusts' CNS undergoes between phases. The genes that change expression the same way in different locusts would be ancestrally relevant for the phenomenon in general and some of those that change expression in a species-specific way would be relevant for the phenomenon in species-specific way.MethodsHere, we use available raw sequencing reads to build transcriptomes and to compare the gene expression changes that the CNS of the two main pest locusts (Schistocerca gregaria and Locusta migratoria) undergo when they turn gregarious. The differentially expressed genes resulting from this comparative study were compared with the content of the L. migratoria core transcriptional phase signature genes database. Our aim is to find out about the species-specificity of the phenomenon, and to highlight the genes that respond in the same way in both species.ResultsThe locust phase change phenomenon seems highly species-specific, very likely due to the inter-specific differences in the material used, and in the biology and life conditions of the different locust species. Research on locust outbreaks, gregariousness and swarming would therefore benefit from considering each locust species apart, and caution is needed when extrapolating results between species-as no species seems representative of all locust species. Still, the 109 genes and 39 non-annotated sequences that we found to change expression level the same way in the two main pest locusts, especially those previously reported as core transcriptional phase signature genes in L. migratoria's CNS-related tissues (10 and 1, respectively), provide material for functional testing in search for important genes to better understand, or to fight against locust outbreaks in a non-species-specific way. The large set of genes that respond in a species-specific way provide material for comparing, understanding and tackling the locust's phase change phenomenon in a species-specific way. The still uncharacterized transcripts that change expression either in a species-specific or the same way between the two species studied here provide material for gene discovery. Functional testing and confirmation are needed in all cases.
BackgroundThe Csangos are an East-Central European ethnographic group living mainly in east of Transylvania in Romania. Traditionally, ethnography distinguishes three Csango subpopulations, the Moldavian, Gyimes and Burzenland Csangos. In our previous study we found that the Moldavian Csangos have East Asian/Siberian Turkic ancestry components that might be unique in the East-Central European region and might help to better understand the history of Hungarian speaking ethnic groups of the area. Since then, we obtained further Csango samples from Moldavia and from a distinct region of Gyimes, which two Csango subgroups are traditionally different since they live in a degree of isolation not only from other people but also from each other. Here we present the first genomic analysis of Gyimes Csangos, which intended to compare the genetic makeup of these two Csango subgroups using both allele-frequency and haplotype-based methods. The main goal of the study was to investigate the genetic isolation of the Csangos on a genome-wide SNP basis and to assess the isolation of Gyimes Csangos, which in contrast to the Moldavians was not yet studied.ResultsOur results show that these two Csango groups show slight differences from each other. We confirmed the genetic isolation of Moldavian Csangos and revealed that Gyimes Csangos have a similar, but detectably weaker isolation. In the case of Gyimes Csangos we detected also a stronger East European or presumably Asian derived ancestry.ConclusionThe Gyimes Csangos show a degree of genetic isolation comparable to that of the Moldavians. The Asian ancestry that differentiates the Moldavian Csango people from the other East-Central European populations may be present in the Gyimes Csangos in an even higher degree, since Gyimes Csango individuals show a more significant share from that ancestry component.
Non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) is one of the top causes of diarrhea worldwide. Ceftriaxone is commonly recommended as the initial treatment option for Salmonella infections due to its antibacterial effectiveness. The objective of this study was to investigate the molecular epidemiological characteristics of NTS and to compare the phenotypic and genotypic profiles of antimicrobial resistance in multidrug-resistant Salmonella strains by sequencing 329 NTS strains collected from a county-level hospital between 2018 and 2021. Multi-locus sequence typing (MLST), antimicrobial resistance genes and plasmid types were identified by BacWGSTdb 2.0 webserver. Phylogenetic analysis of all NTS strains was carried out using Snippy and Gubbins software. The transferability of ceftriaxone resistant plasmids was confirmed through plasmid conjugation assays, and verified by S1-PFGE-Southern blot assays. The predominant serotypes among all NTS strains were Typhimurium (161/329), Enteritidis (49/329) and London (45/329). The most common sequence type observed was ST34 (86/329), followed by ST19 (72/329) and ST11 (47/329). The antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella to a wide range of antimicrobials showed an overall increase. Out of these 37 (11.24%) ceftriaxone-resistant strains, with the majority of them (33/37) being bla(CTX-M). The predominant plasmid types identified were IncHI2 (14/21) and IncI1 (6/21), ranging in size from 70 kb to 360 kb. The conjugation efficiency was calculated with the high conjugation efficiency of 1.1 x 10(- 5) to 9.3 x 10(- 2). The strains varied widely, ranging from 3 to 45,024 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). There are close linkages observed among the predominant lineage, with an average of 78 SNPs between each pair of ST34 strains. The findings contribute to our understanding of the transmission and resistance mechanisms of multidrug-resistant Salmonella, thereby facilitating the development of effective control strategies.
Catalpa bungei, a tree indigenous to China, is renowned for its superior timber quality and as an ornamental in horticulture. To promote the cultivation of C. bungei in cold regions and expand its distribution, enhancing its cold tolerance is essential. The CCCH gene family is widely involved in plant growth, development, and expression under stress conditions, including low-temperature stress. However, a comprehensive identification and analysis of these genes have not yet been conducted. This study aims to identify key cold-tolerance-related genes within the CCCH gene family of C. bungei, providing the necessary theoretical support for its expansion in cold regions. In this study, 61 CCCH genes within C. bungei were identified and characterized. Phylogenetic assessment divided these genes into 9 subfamilies, with 55 members mapped across 16 chromosomes. The analysis of gene structures and protein motifs indicated that members within the same subfamily shared similar exon/intron distribution and motif patterns, supporting the phylogenetic classification. Collinearity analysis suggested that segmental duplications have played a significant role in the expansion of the C. bungei CCCH gene family. Notably, RNA sequencing analysis under 4 degrees C cold stress conditions identified CbuC3H24 and CbuC3H58 as exhibiting the most significant responses, highlighting their importance within the CCCH zinc finger family in response to cold stress. The findings of this study lay a theoretical foundation for further exploring the mechanisms of cold tolerance in C. bungei, providing crucial insights for its cultivation in cold regions.
Background Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are essential for cell-to-cell communication because they transport functionally active molecules, including proteins, RNA, and lipids, from secretory cells to nearby or distant target cells. Seminal plasma contains a large number of EVs (sEVs) that are phenotypically heterogeneous. The aim of the present study was to identify the RNA species contained in two subsets of porcine sEVs of different sizes, namely small sEVs (S-sEVs) and large sEVs (L-sEVs). The two subsets of sEVs were isolated from 54 seminal plasma samples by a method combining serial centrifugations, size exclusion chromatography, and ultrafiltration. The sEVs were characterized using an orthogonal approach. Analysis of RNA content and quantification were performed using RNA-seq analysis. Results The two subsets of sEVs had different size distributions (P < 0.001). They also showed differences in concentration, morphology, and specific protein markers (P < 0.05). A total of 735 RNAs were identified and quantified, which included: (1) mRNAs, rRNAs, snoRNAs, snRNAs, tRNAs, other ncRNAs (termed as "all RNAs"), (2) miRNAs and (3) piRNAs. The distribution pattern of these RNA classes differed between S-sEVs and L-sEVs (P < 0.05). More than half of "all RNAs", miRNAs and piRNAs were found to be differentially abundant between S- and L-sEVs (FDR < 0.1%). Among the differentially abundant RNAs, "all RNAs" were more abundant in L- than in S-sEVs, whereas the most of the miRNAs were more abundant in S- than in L-sEVs. Differentially abundant piRNAs were equally distributed between S- and L-sEVs. Some of the all RNAs and miRNAs found to be differentially abundant between S- and L-sEVs were associated with sperm quality and functionality and male fertility success. Conclusions Small and large sEVs isolated from porcine seminal plasma show quantitative differences in RNA content. These differences would suggest that each sEV subtype exerts different functional activities in the targeted cells, namely spermatozoa and functional cells of the female reproductive tract.
BackgroundGut dysbiosis has been associated with colorectal cancer (CRC), the third most prevalent cancer in the world. This study compares microbiota taxonomic and abundance results obtained by 16S rRNA gene sequencing (16S) and whole shotgun metagenomic sequencing to investigate their reliability for bacteria profiling. The experimental design included 156 human stool samples from healthy controls, advanced (high-risk) colorectal lesion patients (HRL), and CRC cases, with each sample sequenced using both 16S and shotgun methods. We thoroughly compared both sequencing technologies at the species, genus, and family annotation levels, the abundance differences in these taxa, sparsity, alpha and beta diversities, ability to train prediction models, and the similarity of the microbial signature derived from these models.ResultsAs expected, the results showed that 16S detects only part of the gut microbiota community revealed by shotgun, although some genera were only profiled by 16S. The 16S abundance data was sparser and exhibited lower alpha diversity. In lower taxonomic ranks, shotgun and 16S highly differed, partially due to a disagreement in reference databases. When considering only shared taxa, the abundance was positively correlated between the two strategies. We also found a moderate correlation between the shotgun and 16S alpha-diversity measures, as well as their PCoAs. Regarding the machine learning models, only some of the shotgun models showed some degree of predictive power in an independent test set, but we could not demonstrate a clear superiority of one technology over the other. Microbial signatures from both sequencing techniques revealed taxa previously associated with CRC development, e.g., Parvimonas micra.ConclusionsShotgun and 16S sequencing provide two different lenses to examine microbial communities. While we have demonstrated that they can unravel common patterns (including microbial signatures), shotgun often gives a more detailed snapshot than 16S, both in depth and breadth. Instead, 16S will tend to show only part of the picture, giving greater weight to dominant bacteria in a sample. Therefore, we recommend choosing one or another sequencing technique before launching a study. Specifically, shotgun sequencing is preferred for stool microbiome samples and in-depth analyses, while 16S is more suitable for tissue samples and studies with targeted aims.
Background Between 2020 and 2022, eight calves in a Nebraska herd (composite Simmental, Red Angus, Gelbvieh) displayed exercise intolerance during forced activity. In some cases, the calves collapsed and did not recover. Available sire pedigrees contained a paternal ancestor within 2-4 generations in all affected calves. Pedigrees of the calves' dams were unavailable, however, the cows were ranch-raised and retained from prior breeding seasons, where bulls used for breeding occasionally had a common ancestor. Therefore, it was hypothesized that a de novo autosomal recessive variant was causative of exercise intolerance in these calves. Results A genome-wide association analysis utilizing SNP data from 6 affected calves and 715 herd mates, followed by whole-genome sequencing of 2 affected calves led to the identification of a variant in the gene PYGM (BTA29:g.42989581G > A). The variant, confirmed to be present in the skeletal muscle transcriptome, was predicted to produce a premature stop codon (p.Arg650*). The protein product of PYGM, myophosphorylase, breaks down glycogen in skeletal muscle. Glycogen concentrations were fluorometrically assayed as glucose residues demonstrating significantly elevated glycogen concentrations in affected calves compared to cattle carrying the variant and to wild-type controls. The absence of the PYGM protein product in skeletal muscle was confirmed by immunohistochemistry and label-free quantitative proteomics analysis; muscle degeneration was confirmed in biopsy and necropsy samples. Elevated skeletal muscle glycogen persisted after harvest, resulting in a high pH and dark-cutting beef, which is negatively perceived by consumers and results in an economic loss to the industry. Carriers of the variant did not exhibit differences in meat quality or any measures of animal well-being. Conclusions Myophosphorylase deficiency poses welfare concerns for affected animals and negatively impacts the final product. The association of the recessive genotype with dark-cutting beef further demonstrates the importance of genetics to not only animal health but to the quality of their product. Although cattle heterozygous for the variant may not immediately affect the beef industry, identifying carriers will enable selection and breeding strategies to prevent the production of affected calves.
Background Imbalanced diet and exogenous gonadotrophins affect uterine function and morphology. In sheep, FSH-induced superovulation alters implantation-related gene expression, influenced by both treatment and diet. In this study, we used deep RNA sequencing (NGS, RNA-Seq) to expand our understanding of these effects on the caruncular endometrium. Methods Ewes (n = 3-5/group) were separated into control fed (CF), overfed (OF), and underfed (UF) groups, with each group subdivided between FSH (superovulated; SOV) or saline (negative controls; CONT) treatment. Caruncular samples were collected on day 10 of diestrus of the subsequent estrous cycle, with samples from CF_CONT also collected on day 5 to assess time-dependent changes. Results The 1484 differentially expressed genes (DEGs, P < 0.01, FDR < 0.05) identified between CF_CONT animals at days 5 and 10 were predominantly associated with increased immune activity and cellular metabolic processes and cellular proliferation. In CONT animals, imbalanced nutrition (i.e., both OF and UF) was associated with enrichment of terms associated with cell adhesion and differentiation, immune response and angiogenesis. The FSH carry-over effects resulted in a higher number of DEGs in CF animals (1374), than in OF (168) or UF (18), mostly associated with dysregulation of cell cycle and hormonal sensitivity. Conclusion The absence of genes concurrently affected by superovulation (SOV) in all feeding regimes indicates that the effects of FSH on the caruncular transcriptome are multidirectional and dependent upon body condition. Therefore, the homeostasis of ovine caruncles is influenced by both body condition and superovulation (SOV), potentially affecting uterine receptivity.
Background The selection of individuals based on their predicted breeding values and mating of related individuals can increase the proportion of identical-by-descent alleles. In this context, the objectives of this study were to estimate inbreeding coefficients based on alternative metrics and data sources such as pedigree (FPED), hybrid genomic relationship matrix H (FH), and ROH of different length (FROH); and calculate Pearson correlations between the different metrics in a closed Nellore cattle population selected for body weight adjusted to 378 days of age (W378). In addition to total FROH (all classes) coefficients were also estimated based on the size class of the ROH segments: FROH1 (1-2 Mb), FROH2 (2-4 Mb), FROH3 (4-8 Mb), FROH4 (8-16 Mb), and FROH5 (> 16 Mb), and for each chromosome (FROH_CHR). Furthermore, we assessed the effect of each inbreeding metric on birth weight (BW), body weights adjusted to 210 (W210) and W378, scrotal circumference (SC), and residual feed intake (RFI). We also evaluated the chromosome-specific effects of inbreeding on growth traits. Results The correlation between FPED and FROH was 0.60 while between FH and FROH and FH and FPED were 0.69 and 0.61, respectively. The annual rate of inbreeding was 0.16% for FPED, 0.02% for FH, and 0.16% for FROH. A 1% increase in FROH5 resulted in a reduction of up to -1.327 +/- 0.495 kg in W210 and W378. Four inbreeding coefficients (FPED, FH, FROH2, and FROH5) had a significant effect on W378, with reductions of up to -3.810 +/- 1.753 kg per 1% increase in FROH2. There was an unfavorable effect of FPED on RFI (0.01 +/- 0.0002 kg dry matter/day) and of FROH on SC (-0.056 +/- 0.022 cm). The FROH_CHR coefficients calculated for BTA3, BTA5, and BTA8 significantly affected the growth traits. Conclusions Inbreeding depression was observed for all traits evaluated. However, these effects were greater for the criterion used for selection of the animals (i.e., W378). The increase in the genomic inbreeding was associated with a higher inbreeding depression on the traits evaluated when compared to pedigree-based inbreeding. Genomic information should be used as a tool during mating to optimize control of inbreeding and, consequently, minimize inbreeding depression in Nellore cattle.
Deep Mutational Scanning (DMS) assays are powerful tools to study sequence-function relationships by measuring the effects of thousands of sequence variants on protein function. During a DMS experiment, several technical artefacts might distort non-linearly the functional score obtained, potentially biasing the interpretation of the results. We therefore tested several technical parameters in the deepPCA workflow, a DMS assay for protein-protein interactions, in order to identify technical sources of non-linearities. We found that parameters common to many DMS assays such as amount of transformed DNA, timepoint of harvest and library composition can cause non-linearities in the data. Designing experiments in a way to minimize these non-linear effects will improve the quantification and interpretation of mutation effects.
Background: Feeding costs represent the largest expenditures in beef production. Therefore, the animal efficiency in converting feed in high-quality protein for human consumption plays a major role in the environmental impact of the beef industry and in the beef producers' profitability. In this context, breeding animals for improved feed efficiency through genomic selection has been considered as a strategic practice in modern breeding programs around the world. Copy number variation (CNV) is a less-studied source of genetic variation that can contribute to phenotypic variability in complex traits. In this context, this study aimed to: (1) identify CNV and CNV regions (CNVRs) in the genome of Nellore cattle (Bos taurus indicus); (2) assess potential associations between the identified CNVR and weaning weight (W210), body weight measured at the time of selection (WSel), average daily gain (ADG), dry matter intake (DMI), residual feed intake (RFI), time spent at the feed bunk (TF), and frequency of visits to the feed bunk (FF); and, (3) perform functional enrichment analyses of the significant CNVR identified for each of the traits evaluated.Results: A total of 3,161 CNVs and 561 CNVRs ranging from 4,973 bp to 3,215,394 bp were identified. The CNVRs covered up to 99,221,894 bp (3.99%) of the Nellore autosomal genome. Seventeen CNVR were significantly associated with dry matter intake and feeding frequency (number of daily visits to the feed bunk). The functional annotation of the associated CNVRs revealed important candidate genes related to metabolism that may be associated with the phenotypic expression of the evaluated traits. Furthermore, Gene Ontology (GO) analyses revealed 19 enrichment processes associated with FF.Conclusions: A total of 3,161 CNVs and 561 CNVRs were identified and characterized in a Nellore cattle population. Various CNVRs were significantly associated with DMI and FF, indicating that CNVs play an important role in key biological pathways and in the phenotypic expression of feeding behavior and growth traits in Nellore cattle.
Mitochondrial genomes play important roles in studying genome evolution, phylogenetic analyses, and species identification. Amphipods (Class Malacostraca, Order Amphipoda) are one of the most ecologically diverse crustacean groups occurring in a diverse array of aquatic and terrestrial environments globally, from freshwater streams and lakes to groundwater aquifers and the deep sea, but we have a limited understanding of how habitat influences the molecular evolution of mitochondrial energy metabolism. Subterranean amphipods likely experience different evolutionary pressures on energy management compared to surface-dwelling taxa that generally encounter higher levels of predation and energy resources and live in more variable environments. In this study, we compared the mitogenomes, including the 13 protein-coding genes involved in the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway, of surface and subterranean amphipods to uncover potentially different molecular signals of energy metabolism between surface and subterranean environments in this diverse crustacean group. We compared base composition, codon usage, gene order rearrangement, conducted comparative mitogenomic and phylogenomic analyses, and examined evolutionary signals of 35 amphipod mitogenomes representing 13 families, with an emphasis on Crangonyctidae. Mitogenome size, AT content, GC-skew, gene order, uncommon start codons, location of putative control region (CR), length of rrnL and intergenic spacers differed between surface and subterranean amphipods. Among crangonyctid amphipods, the spring-dwelling Crangonyx forbesi exhibited a unique gene order, a long nad5 locus, longer rrnL and rrnS loci, and unconventional start codons. Evidence of directional selection was detected in several protein-encoding genes of the OXPHOS pathway in the mitogenomes of surface amphipods, while a signal of purifying selection was more prominent in subterranean species, which is consistent with the hypothesis that the mitogenome of surface-adapted species has evolved in response to a more energy demanding environment compared to subterranean amphipods. Overall, gene order, locations of non-coding regions, and base-substitution rates points to habitat as an important factor influencing the evolution of amphipod mitogenomes.
The growth factor Neuregulin-1 (NRG1) has pleiotropic roles in proliferation and differentiation of the stem cell niche in different tissues. It has been implicated in gut, brain and muscle development and repair. Six isoform classes of NRG1 and over 28 protein isoforms have been previously described. Here we report a new class of NRG1, designated NRG1-VII to denote that these NRG1 isoforms arise from a myeloid-specific transcriptional start site (TSS) previously uncharacterized. Long-read sequencing was used to identify eight high-confidence NRG1-VII transcripts. These transcripts presented major structural differences from one another, through the use of cassette exons and alternative stop codons. Expression of NRG1-VII was confirmed in primary human monocytes and tissue resident macrophages and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived macrophages (iPSC-derived macrophages). Isoform switching via cassette exon usage and alternate polyadenylation was apparent during monocyte maturation and macrophage differentiation. NRG1-VII is the major class expressed by the myeloid lineage, including tissue-resident macrophages. Analysis of public gene expression data indicates that monocytes and macrophages are a primary source of NRG1. The size and structure of class VII isoforms suggests that they may be more diffusible through tissues than other NRG1 classes. However, the specific roles of class VII variants in tissue homeostasis and repair have not yet been determined.
Background Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a polygenic, severe metabopsychiatric disorder with poorly understood aetiology. Eight significant loci have been identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based heritability was estimated to be similar to 11-17, yet causal variants remain elusive. It is therefore important to define the full spectrum of genetic variants in the wider regions surrounding these significantly associated loci. The hypothesis we evaluate here is that unrecognised or relatively unexplored variants in these regions exist and are promising targets for future functional analyses. To test this hypothesis, we implemented a novel approach with targeted nanopore sequencing (Oxford Nanopore Technologies) for 200 kb regions centred on each of the eight AN-associated loci in 10 AN case samples. Our bioinformatics pipeline entailed base-calling and alignment with Dorado and minimap2 software, followed by variant calling with four separate tools, Sniffles2, Clair3, Straglr, and NanoVar. We then leveraged publicly available databases to characterise these loci in putative functional context and prioritise a subset of potentially relevant variants.
Bovine tuberculosis (bTB), caused by Mycobacterium bovis (M. bovis), represents a significant problem for the agriculture industry as well as posing a risk for human health. Current diagnostic tests for bTB target the cell-mediated immune (CMI) response to infection with M. bovis, primarily through screening of animals with the tuberculin skin test. Epigenetic modifications have been shown to alter the course of the immune response and differentially methylated regions (DMRs) might also influence the outcome of the skin test in cattle. Whole Genome Bisulphite Sequencing (WGBS) was used to profile DNA methylation levels from peripheral blood of a group of cattle identified as test positive for M. bovis (positive for the single intradermal comparative tuberculin test (SICTT) and/or the interferon-gamma release assay compared to a test negative control group [n = 8/group, total of 16 WGBS libraries]. Although global methylation profiles were similar for both groups across the genome, 223 DMRs and 159 Differentially Promoter Methylated Genes (DPMGs) were identified between groups with an excess of hypermethylated sites in SICTT positive cattle (threshold > 15% differential methylation). Genes located within these DMRs included the Interleukin 1 receptor (IL1R1) and MHC related genes (BOLA and BOLA-DQB). KEGG pathway analysis identified enrichment of genes involved in Calcium and MAPK signalling, as well as metabolism pathways. Analysis of DMRs in a subset of SICTT negative cattle that were IFN-gamma positive showed differential methylation of genes including Interleukin 10 Receptor, alpha (IL10RA), Interleukin 17 F (IL17F) and host defence peptides (DEFB and BDEF109). This study has identified a number of immune gene loci at which differential methylation is associated with SICTT test results and the degree of methylation could influence effective host immune responses.
BackgroundGenomic instability and evading apoptosis are two fundamental hallmarks of cancer and closely linked to DNA damage response (DDR). By analyzing expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) upon cell stimulation (called exposure eQTL (e2QTL)) it is possible to identify context specific gene regulatory variants and connect them to oncological diseases based on genome-wide association studies (GWAS).ResultsWe isolate CD8+ T cells from 461 healthy donors and stimulate them with high doses of 5 different carcinogens to identify regulatory mechanisms of DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Across all stimuli, we find 5,373 genes to be differentially expressed, with 85% to 99% of these genes being suppressed. While upregulated genes are specific to distinct stimuli, downregulated genes are shared across conditions but exhibit enrichment in biological processes depending on the DNA damage type. Analysis of eQTL reveals 654 regulated genes across conditions. Among them, 47 genes are significant e2QTL, representing a fraction of 4% to 5% per stimulus. To unveil disease relevant genetic variants, we compare eQTL and e2QTL with GWAS risk variants. We identify gene regulatory variants for KLF2, PIP4K2A, GPR160, RPS18, ARL17B and XBP1 that represent risk variants for oncological diseases.ConclusionOur study highlights the relevance of gene regulatory variants influencing DNA damage-induced apoptosis in cancer. The results provide new insights in cellular mechanisms and corresponding genes contributing to inter-individual effects in cancer development.
Background Sorghum anthracnose is a major disease that hampers the productivity of the crop globally. The disease is caused by the hemibiotrophic fungal pathogen Colletotrichum sublineola. The identification of anthracnose-resistant sorghum genotypes, defining resistance loci and the underlying genes, and their introgression into adapted cultivars are crucial for enhancing productivity. In this study, we conducted field experiments on 358 diverse accessions of Ethiopian sorghum. Quantitative resistance to anthracnose was evaluated at locations characterized by a heavy natural infestation that is suitable for disease resistance screening. Results The field-based screening identified 53 accessions that were resistant across locations, while 213 accessions exhibited variable resistance against local pathotypes. Genome-wide association analysis (GWAS) was performed using disease response scores on 329 accessions and 83,861 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) generated through genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS). We identified 38 loci significantly associated with anthracnose resistance. Interestingly, a subset of these loci harbor genes encoding receptor-like kinases (RLK), nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeats (NLRs), stress-induced antifungal tyrosine kinase that have been previously implicated in disease resistance. A SNP on chromosome 4 (S04_66140995) and two SNPs on chromosome 2 (S02_75784037, S02_2031925), localized with-in the coding region of genes that encode a putative stress-induced antifungal kinase, an F-Box protein, and Xa21-binding RLK that were strongly associated with anthracnose resistance. We also identified highly significant associations between anthracnose resistance and three SNPs linked to genes (Sobic.002G058400, Sobic.008G156600, Sobic.005G033400) encoding an orthologue of the widely known NLR protein (RPM1), Leucine Rich Repeat family protein, and Heavy Metal Associated domain-containing protein, respectively. Other SNPs linked to predicted immune response genes were also significantly associated with anthracnose resistance. Conclusions The sorghum germplasm collections used in the present study are genetically diverse. They harbor potentially useful, yet undiscovered, alleles for anthracnose resistance. This is supported by the identification of novel loci that are enriched for disease resistance regulators such as NLRs, LRKs, Xa21-binding LRK, and antifungal proteins. The genotypic data available for these accessions offer a valuable resource for sorghum breeders to effectively improve the crop. The genomic regions and candidate genes identified can be used to design markers for molecular breeding of sorghum diseases resistance.
There is an ongoing process in which mitochondrial sequences are being integrated into the nuclear genome. The importance of these sequences has already been revealed in cancer biology, forensic, phylogenetic studies and in the evolution of the eukaryotic genetic information. Human and numerous model organisms' genomes were described from those sequences point of view. Furthermore, recent studies were published on the patterns of these nuclear localised mitochondrial sequences in different taxa.However, the results of the previously released studies are difficult to compare due to the lack of standardised methods and/or using few numbers of genomes. Therefore, in this paper our primary goal is to establish a uniform mining pipeline to explore these nuclear localised mitochondrial sequences.Our results show that the frequency of several repetitive elements is higher in the flanking regions of these sequences than expected. A machine learning model reveals that the flanking regions' repetitive elements and different structural characteristics are highly influential during the integration process.In this paper, we introduce a general mining pipeline for all mammalian genomes. The workflow is publicly available and is believed to serve as a validated baseline for future research in this field. We confirm the widespread opinion, on - as to our current knowledge - the largest dataset, that structural circumstances and events corresponding to repetitive elements are highly significant. An accurate model has also been trained to predict these sequences and their corresponding flanking regions.
Background Chemoreception is crucial for insect fitness, underlying for instance food-, host-, and mate finding. Chemicals in the environment are detected by receptors from three divergent gene families: odorant receptors (ORs), gustatory receptors (GRs), and ionotropic receptors (IRs). However, how the chemoreceptor gene families evolve in parallel with ecological specializations remains poorly understood, especially in the order Coleoptera. Hence, we sequenced the genome and annotated the chemoreceptor genes of the specialised ambrosia beetle Trypodendron lineatum (Coleoptera, Curculionidae, Scolytinae) and compared its chemoreceptor gene repertoires with those of other scolytines with different ecological adaptations, as well as a polyphagous cerambycid species. Results We identified 67 ORs, 38 GRs, and 44 IRs in T. lineatum ('Tlin'). Across gene families, T. lineatum has fewer chemoreceptors compared to related scolytines, the coffee berry borer Hypothenemus hampei and the mountain pine beetle Dendroctonus ponderosae, and clearly fewer receptors than the polyphagous cerambycid Anoplophora glabripennis. The comparatively low number of chemoreceptors is largely explained by the scarcity of large receptor lineage radiations, especially among the bitter taste GRs and the 'divergent' IRs, and the absence of alternatively spliced GR genes. Only one non-fructose sugar receptor was found, suggesting several sugar receptors have been lost. Also, we found no orthologue in the 'GR215 clade', which is widely conserved across Coleoptera. Two TlinORs are orthologous to ORs that are functionally conserved across curculionids, responding to 2-phenylethanol (2-PE) and green leaf volatiles (GLVs), respectively. Conclusions Trypodendron lineatum reproduces inside the xylem of decaying conifers where it feeds on its obligate fungal mutualist Phialophoropsis ferruginea. Like previous studies, our results suggest that stenophagy correlates with small chemoreceptor numbers in wood-boring beetles; indeed, the few GRs may be due to its restricted fungal diet. The presence of TlinORs orthologous to those detecting 2-PE and GLVs in other species suggests these compounds are important for T. lineatum. Future functional studies should test this prediction, and chemoreceptor annotations should be conducted on additional ambrosia beetle species to investigate whether few chemoreceptors is a general trait in this specialized group of beetles.
Background Flight can drastically enhance dispersal capacity and is a key trait defining the potential of exotic insect species to spread and invade new habitats. The phytophagous European spongy moths (ESM, Lymantria dispar dispar) and Asian spongy moths (ASM; a multi-species group represented here by L. d. asiatica and L. d. japonica), are globally invasive species that vary in adult female flight capability-female ASM are typically flight capable, whereas female ESM are typically flightless. Genetic markers of flight capability would supply a powerful tool for flight profiling of these species at any intercepted life stage. To assess the functional complexity of spongy moth flight and to identify potential markers of flight capability, we used multiple genetic approaches aimed at capturing complementary signals of putative flight-relevant genetic divergence between ESM and ASM: reduced representation genome-wide association studies, whole genome sequence comparisons, and developmental transcriptomics. We then judged the candidacy of flight-associated genes through functional analyses aimed at addressing the proximate demands of flight and salient features of the ecological context of spongy moth flight evolution. Results Candidate gene sets were typically non-overlapping across different genetic approaches, with only nine gene annotations shared between any pair of approaches. We detected an array of flight-relevant functional themes across gene sets that collectively suggest divergence in flight capability between European and Asian spongy moth lineages has coincided with evolutionary differentiation in multiple aspects of flight development, execution, and surrounding life history. Overall, our results indicate that spongy moth flight evolution has shaped or been influenced by a large and functionally broad network of traits. Conclusions Our study identified a suite of flight-associated genes in spongy moths suited to exploration of the genetic architecture and evolution of flight, or validation for flight profiling purposes. This work illustrates how complementary genetic approaches combined with phenotypically targeted functional analyses can help to characterize genetically complex traits.
Background Tubulins play crucial roles in numerous fundamental processes of plant development. In flowering plants, tubulins are grouped into alpha-, beta- and gamma-subfamilies, while alpha- and beta-tubulins possess a large isotype diversity and gene number variations among different species. This circumstance leads to insufficient recognition of orthologous isotypes and significantly complicates extrapolation of obtained experimental results, and brings difficulties for the identification of particular tubulin isotype function. The aim of this research is to identify and characterize tubulins of an emerging biofuel crop Camelina sativa. Results We report comprehensive identification and characterization of tubulin gene family in C. sativa, including analyses of exon-intron organization, duplicated genes comparison, proper isotype designation, phylogenetic analysis, and expression patterns in different tissues. 17 alpha-, 34 beta- and 6 gamma-tubulin genes were identified and assigned to a particular isotype. Recognition of orthologous tubulin isotypes was cross-referred, involving data of phylogeny, synteny analyses and genes allocation on reconstructed genomic blocks of Ancestral Crucifer Karyotype. An investigation of expression patterns of tubulin homeologs revealed the predominant role of N-6 (A) and N-7 (B) subgenomes in tubulin expression at various developmental stages, contrarily to general the dominance of transcripts of H-7 (C) subgenome. Conclusions For the first time a complete set of tubulin gene family members was identified and characterized for allohexaploid C. sativa species. The study demonstrates the comprehensive approach of precise inferring gene orthology. The applied technique allowed not only identifying C. sativa tubulin orthologs in model Arabidopsis species and tracking tubulin gene evolution, but also uncovered that A. thaliana is missing orthologs for several particular isotypes of alpha- and beta-tubulins.
The harsh and dry conditions of desert environments have resulted in genomic adaptations, allowing for desert organisms to withstand prolonged drought, extreme temperatures, and limited food resources. Here, we present a comprehensive exploration of gene expression across five tissues (kidney, liver, lung, gastrointestinal tract, and hypothalamus) and 19 phenotypic measurements to explore the whole-organism physiological and genomic response to water deprivation in the desert-adapted cactus mouse (Peromyscus eremicus). The findings encompass the identification of differentially expressed genes and correlative analysis between phenotypes and gene expression patterns across multiple tissues. Specifically, we found robust activation of the vasopressin renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) pathways, whose primary function is to manage water and solute balance. Animals reduced food intake during water deprivation, and upregulation of PCK1 highlights the adaptive response to reduced oral intake via its actions aimed at maintained serum glucose levels. Even with such responses to maintain water balance, hemoconcentration still occurred, prompting a protective downregulation of genes responsible for the production of clotting factors while simultaneously enhancing angiogenesis which is thought to maintain tissue perfusion. In this study, we elucidate the complex mechanisms involved in water balance in the desert-adapted cactus mouse, P. eremicus. By prioritizing a comprehensive analysis of whole-organism physiology and multi-tissue gene expression in a simulated desert environment, we describe the complex response of regulatory processes.
Pinellia ternata (Thunb.) Briet., a valuable herb native to China, is susceptible to the "sprout tumble" phenomenon because of high temperatures, resulting in a significant yield reduction. However, the molecular regulatory mechanisms underlying the response of P. ternata to heat stress are not well understood. In this study, we integrated transcriptome and miRNAome sequencing to identify heat-response genes, microRNAs (miRNAs), and key miRNA-target pairs in P. ternata that differed between heat-stress and room-temperature conditions. Transcriptome analysis revealed extensive reprogramming of 4,960 genes across various categories, predominantly associated with cellular and metabolic processes, responses to stimuli, biological regulation, cell parts, organelles, membranes, and catalytic and binding activities. miRNAome sequencing identified 1,597 known/conserved miRNAs that were differentially expressed between the two test conditions. According to the analysis, genes and miRNAs associated with the regulation of transcription, DNA template, transcription factor activity, and sequence-specific DNA binding pathways may play a major role in the resistance to heat stress in P. ternata. Integrated analysis of the transcriptome and miRNAome expression data revealed 41 high-confidence miRNA-mRNA pairs, forming 25 modules. MYB-like proteins and calcium-responsive transcription coactivators may play an integral role in heat-stress resistance in P. ternata. Additionally, the candidate genes and miRNAs were subjected to quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to validate their expression patterns. These results offer a foundation for future studies exploring the mechanisms and critical genes involved in heat-stress resistance in P. ternata.
BackgroundSignificant differences in immune responses, prevalence or susceptibility of diseases and treatment responses have been described between males and females. Despite this, sex-differentiation analysis of the genetic architecture of inflammatory proteins is largely unexplored. We performed sex-stratified meta-analysis after protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) mapping using inflammatory biomarkers profiled using targeted proteomics (Olink inflammatory panel) of two population-based cohorts of Europeans.ResultsEven though, around 67% of the pQTLs demonstrated shared effect between sexes, colocalization analysis identified two loci in the males (LINC01135 and ITGAV) and three loci (CNOT10, SRD5A2, and LILRB5) in the females with evidence of sex-dependent modulation by pQTL variants. Furthermore, we identified pathways with relevant functions in the sex-biased pQTL variants. We also showed through cross-validation that the sex-specific pQTLs are linked with sex-specific phenotypic traits.ConclusionOur study demonstrates the relevance of genetic sex-stratified analysis in the context of genetic dissection of protein abundances among individuals and reveals that, sex-specific pQTLs might mediate sex-linked phenotypes. Identification of sex-specific pQTLs associated with sex-biased diseases can help realize the promise of individualized treatment.
BackgroundArchaea and Bacteria are distinct domains of life that are adapted to a variety of ecological niches. Several genome-based methods have been developed for their accurate classification, yet many aspects of the specific genomic features that determine these differences are not fully understood. In this study, we used publicly available whole-genome sequences from bacteria (N=2546\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$N=2546$$\end{document}) and archaea (N=109\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$N=109$$\end{document}). From these, a set of genomic features (nucleotide frequencies and proportions, coding sequences (CDS), non-coding, ribosomal and transfer RNA genes (ncRNA, rRNA, tRNA), Chargaff's, topological entropy and Shannon's entropy scores) was extracted and used as input data to develop machine learning models for the classification of archaea and bacteria.ResultsThe classification accuracy ranged from 0.993 (Random Forest) to 0.998 (Neural Networks). Over the four models, only 11 examples were misclassified, especially those belonging to the minority class (Archaea). From variable importance, tRNA topological and Shannon's entropy, nucleotide frequencies in tRNA, rRNA and ncRNA, CDS, tRNA and rRNA Chargaff's scores have emerged as the top discriminating factors. In particular, tRNA entropy (both topological and Shannon's) was the most important genomic feature for classification, pointing at the complex interactions between the genetic code, tRNAs and the translational machinery.ConclusionstRNA, rRNA and ncRNA genes emerged as the key genomic elements that underpin the classification of archaea and bacteria. In particular, higher nucleotide diversity was found in tRNA from bacteria compared to archaea. The analysis of the few classification errors reflects the complex phylogenetic relationships between bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes.
Background A fine balance of feto-maternal resource allocation is required to support pregnancy, which depends on interactions between maternal and fetal genetic potential, maternal nutrition and environment, endometrial and placental functions. In particular, some imprinted genes have a role in regulating maternal-fetal nutrient exchange, but few have been documented in the endometrium. The aim of this study is to describe the expression of 42 genes, with parental expression, in the endometrium comparing two extreme breeds: Large White (LW); Meishan (MS) with contrasting neonatal mortality and maturity at two days of gestation (D90-D110). We investigated their potential contribution to fetal maturation exploring genes-fetal phenotypes relationships. Last, we hypothesized that the fetal genome and sex influence their endometrial expression. For this purpose, pure and reciprocally crossbred fetuses were produced using LW and MS breeds. Thus, in the same uterus, endometrial samples were associated with its purebred or crossbred fetuses.Results Among the 22 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 14 DEGs were differentially regulated between the two days of gestation. More gestational changes were described in LW (11 DEGs) than in MS (2 DEGs). Nine DEGs were differentially regulated between the two extreme breeds, highlighting differences in the regulation of endometrial angiogenesis, nutrient transport and energy metabolism. We identified DEGs that showed high correlations with indicators of fetal maturation, such as ponderal index at D90 and fetal blood fructose level and placental weight at D110. We pointed out for the first time the influence of fetal sex and genome on endometrial expression at D90, highlighting AMPD3, CITED1 and H19 genes. We demonstrated that fetal sex affects the expression of five imprinted genes in LW endometrium. Fetal genome influenced the expression of four genes in LW endometrium but not in MS endometrium. Interestingly, both fetal sex and fetal genome interact to influence endometrial gene expression.Results Among the 22 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 14 DEGs were differentially regulated between the two days of gestation. More gestational changes were described in LW (11 DEGs) than in MS (2 DEGs). Nine DEGs were differentially regulated between the two extreme breeds, highlighting differences in the regulation of endometrial angiogenesis, nutrient transport and energy metabolism. We identified DEGs that showed high correlations with indicators of fetal maturation, such as ponderal index at D90 and fetal blood fructose level and placental weight at D110. We pointed out for the first time the influence of fetal sex and genome on endometrial expression at D90, highlighting AMPD3, CITED1 and H19 genes. We demonstrated that fetal sex affects the expression of five imprinted genes in LW endometrium. Fetal genome influenced the expression of four genes in LW endometrium but not in MS endometrium. Interestingly, both fetal sex and fetal genome interact to influence endometrial gene expression.Conclusions These data provide evidence for some sexual dimorphism in the pregnant endometrium and for the contribution of the fetal genome to feto-maternal interactions at the end of gestation. They suggest that the paternal genome may contribute significantly to piglet survival, especially in crossbreeding production systems.
Medicago truncatula, model legume and alfalfa relative, has served as an essential resource for advancing our understanding of legume physiology, functional genetics, and crop improvement traits. Necrotrophic fungus, Ascochyta medicaginicola, the causal agent of spring black stem (SBS) and leaf spot is a devasting foliar disease of alfalfa affecting stand survival, yield, and forage quality. Host resistance to SBS disease is poorly understood, and control methods rely on cultural practices. Resistance has been observed in M. truncatula accession SA27063 (HM078) with two recessively inherited quantitative-trait loci (QTL), rnpm1 and rnpm2, previously reported. To shed light on host resistance, we carried out a de novo genome assembly of HM078. The genome, referred to as MtHM078 v1.0, is comprised of 23 contigs totaling 481.19 Mbp. Notably, this assembly contains a substantial amount of novel centromere-related repeat sequences due to deep long-read sequencing. Genome annotation resulted in 98.4% of BUSCO fabales proteins being complete. The assembly enabled sequence-level analysis of rnpm1 and rnpm2 for gene content, synteny, and structural variation between SBS-resistant accession SA27063 (HM078) and SBS-susceptible accession A17 (HM101). Fourteen candidate genes were identified, and some have been implicated in resistance to necrotrophic fungi. Especially interesting candidates include loss-of-function events in HM078 because they fit the inverse gene-for-gene model, where resistance is recessively inherited. In rnpm1, these include a loss-of-function in a disease resistance gene due to a premature stop codon, and a 10.85 kbp retrotransposon-like insertion disrupting a ubiquitin conjugating E2. In rnpm2, we identified a frameshift mutation causing a loss-of-function in a glycosidase, as well as a missense and frameshift mutation altering an F-box family protein. This study generated a high-quality genome of HM078 and has identified promising candidates, that once validated, could be further studied in alfalfa to enhance disease resistance.
Understanding the syntenic relationships among genomes is crucial to elucidate the genomic mechanisms that drive the evolution of species. The nematode Caenorhabditis is a good model for studying genomic evolution due to the well-established biology of Caenorhabditis elegans and the availability of > 50 genomes in the genus. However, effective alignment of more than ten species in Caenorhabditis has not been conducted before, and there is currently no tool to visualize the synteny of more than two species. In this study, we used Progressive Cactus, a recently developed multigenome aligner, to align the genomes of eleven Caenorhabditis species. Through the progressive alignment, we reconstructed nine ancestral genomes, analyzed the mutational types that cause genomic rearrangement during speciation, and found that insertion and duplication are the major driving forces for genome expansion. Dioecious species appear to expand their genomes more than androdioecious species. We then built an online interactive app called WormSynteny to visualize the syntenic relationship among the eleven species. Users can search the alignment dataset using C. elegans query sequences, construct synteny plots at different genomic scales, and use a set of options to control alignment output and plot presentation. We showcased the use of WormSynteny to visualize the syntenic conservation of one-to-one orthologues among species, tandem and dispersed gene duplication in C. elegans, and the evolution of exon and intron structures. Importantly, the integration of orthogroup information with synteny linkage in WormSynteny allows the easy visualization of conserved genomic blocks and disruptive rearrangement. In conclusion, WormSynteny provides immediate access to the syntenic relationships among the most widely used Caenorhabditis species and can facilitate numerous comparative genomics studies. This pilot study with eleven species also serves as a proof-of-concept to a more comprehensive larger-scale analysis using hundreds of nematode genomes, which is expected to reveal mechanisms that drive genomic evolution in the Nematoda phylum. Finally, the WormSynteny software provides a generalizable solution for visualizing the output of Progressive Cactus with interactive graphics, which would be useful for a broad community of genome researchers.
Background In the context of early sowing of maize as a promising adaptation strategy that could significantly reduce the negative effects of climate change, an in-depth understanding of mechanisms underlying plant response to low-temperature stress is demanded. Although microRNAs (miRNAs) have been recognized as key regulators of plant stress response, research on their role in chilling tolerance of maize during early seedling stages is scarce. Therefore, it is of great significance to explore chilling-responsive miRNAs, reveal their expression patterns and associated target genes, as well as to examine the possible functions of the conserved and novel miRNAs. In this study, the role of miRNAs was examined in 5d-old maize seedlings of one tolerant and one sensitive inbred line exposed to chilling (10/8 degrees C) stress for 6 h and 24 h, by applying high throughput sequencing.Results A total of 145 annotated known miRNAs belonging to 30 families and 876 potentially novel miRNAs were identified. Differential expression (DE) analysis between control and stress conditions identified 98 common miRNAs for both genotypes at one time point and eight miRNAs at both time points. Target prediction and enrichment analysis showed that the DE zma-miR396, zma-miR156, zma-miR319, and zma-miR159 miRNAs modulate growth and development. Furthermore, it was found that several other DE miRNAs were involved in abiotic stress response: antioxidative mechanisms (zma-miR398), signal transduction (zma-miR156, zma-miR167, zma-miR169) and regulation of water content (zma-miR164, zma-miR394, zma-miR396). The results underline the zma-miRNAs involvement in the modulation of their target genes expression as an important aspect of the plant's survival strategy and acclimation to chilling stress conditions.Conclusions To our understanding, this is the first study on miRNAs in 5-d old seedlings' response to chilling stress, providing data on the role of known and novel miRNAs post-transcriptional regulation of expressed genes and contributing a possible platform for further network and functional analysis.
Background The genomic region that lies between the telomere and chromosome body, termed the subtelomere, is heterochromatic, repeat-rich, and frequently undergoes rearrangement. Within this region, large-scale structural changes enable gene diversification, and, as such, large multicopy gene families are often found at the subtelomere. In some parasites, genes associated with proliferation, invasion, and survival are often found in these regions, where they benefit from the subtelomere's highly plastic, rapidly changing nature. The increasing availability of complete (or near complete) parasite genomes provides an opportunity to investigate these typically poorly defined and overlooked genomic regions and potentially reveal relevant gene families necessary for the parasite's lifestyle. Results Using the latest chromosome-scale genome assembly and hallmark repeat richness observed at chromosome termini, we have identified and characterised the subtelomeres of Schistosoma mansoni, a metazoan parasitic flatworm that infects over 250 million people worldwide. Approximately 12% of the S. mansoni genome is classified as subtelomeric, and, in line with other organisms, we find these regions to be gene-poor but rich in transposable elements. We find that S. mansoni subtelomeres have undergone extensive interchromosomal recombination and that these sites disproportionately contribute to the 2.3% of the genome derived from segmental duplications. This recombination has led to the expansion of subtelomeric gene clusters containing 103 genes, including the immunomodulatory annexins and other gene families with unknown roles. The largest of these is a 49-copy plexin domain-containing protein cluster, exclusively expressed in the tegument-the tissue located at the host-parasite physical interface-of intramolluscan life stages. Conclusions We propose that subtelomeric regions act as a genomic playground for trial-and-error of gene duplication and subsequent divergence. Owing to the importance of subtelomeric genes in other parasites, gene families implicated in this subtelomeric expansion within S. mansoni warrant further characterisation for a potential role in parasitism.
Background Kelps are not only ecologically important, being primary producers and habitat forming species, they also hold substantial economic potential. Expansion of the kelp cultivation industry raises the interest for genetic improvement of kelp for cultivation, as well as concerns about genetic introgression from cultivated to wild populations. Thus, increased understanding of population genetics in natural kelp populations is crucial. Genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) is a powerful tool for studying population genetics. Here, using Saccharina latissima (sugar kelp) as our study species, we characterize the population genetics at a fine geographic scale, while also investigating the influence of marker type (biallelic SNPs versus multi-allelic short read-backed haplotypes) and minor allele count (MAC) thresholds on estimated population genetic metrics.
Apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) coding variants, termed G1 and G2, are established genetic risk factors for a growing spectrum of diseases, including kidney disease, in individuals of African ancestry. Evidence suggests that the risk variants, which show a recessive mode of inheritance, lead to toxic gain-of-function changes of the APOL1 protein. Disease occurrence and presentation vary, likely due to modifiers or second hits. To understand the role of the epigenetic landscape in relation to APOL1 risk variants, we performed methylation quantitative trait locus (meQTL) analysis to identify differentially methylated CpGs influenced by APOL1 risk variants in 611 African American individuals. We identified five CpGs that were significantly associated with APOL1 risk alleles in discovery and replication studies, and one CpG-APOL1 association was independent of other genomic variants. Our study highlights proximal DNA methylation alterations that may help explain the variable disease risk and clinical manifestation of APOL1 variants.
BackgroundHypersaline habitats, as extreme environments, are a great source of well-adapted organisms with unique properties as they have evolved various strategies to cope with these extreme conditions. Bioinformatics and genomic mining may shed light on evolutionary relationships among them. Therefore, the aim of this study was to assess the biodiversity and especially the strategies evolved within the Idiomarina genus, with the primary focus on the taxonomy and genomic adaptations of two novel strains affiliated with Idiomarina genus isolated from unique environment - brines of two Early Miocene salt deposits.ResultsBoth analyzed species belonged to the Idiomarina loihiensis cluster with similarity levels of 16S rRNA gene sequences as high as 99.5% and showed a significant genome size reduction, known characteristic of Idiomarina genomes, though within the genome of Sol25 strain the lowest extent of the carbohydrate utilization genes reduction was observed t among the Idiomarina species. Moreover, the comparative genome analyses indicated that despite both strains being isolated from geographically and geologically similar environments (brines from at least 12 Ma), the species showed higher relatedness to other Idiomarina species than to each other.ConclusionThe present findings highlighted the importance of genomic data in resolving taxonomic uncertainties and understanding of adaptation strategies of extremophiles. Geographic isolation likely contributed to population divergence of the Idiomarina genus, and the recent study offered insights into biogeographic patterns and allopatric speciation of this bacterial group.
Background The ageing process is a multifaceted phenomenon marked by the gradual deterioration of cellular and organismal functions, accompanied by an elevated susceptibility to diseases. The intricate interplay between genetic and environmental factors complicates research, particularly in complex mammalian models. In this context, simple invertebrate organisms have been pivotal, but the current models lack detectable DNA methylation limiting the exploration of this critical epigenetic ageing mechanism. This study introduces Nasonia vitripennis, the jewel wasp, as an innovative invertebrate model for investigating the epigenetics of ageing. Leveraging its advantages as a model organism and possessing a functional DNA methylation system, Nasonia emerges as a valuable addition to ageing research. Results Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing unveiled dynamic alterations in DNA methylation, with differentially methylated CpGs between distinct time points in both male and female wasps. These changes were associated with numerous genes, enriching for functions related to telomere maintenance, histone methylation, and mRNA catabolic processes. Additionally, other CpGs were found to be variably methylated at each timepoint. Sex-specific effects on epigenetic entropy were observed, indicating differential patterns in the loss of epigenetic stability over time. Constructing an epigenetic clock containing 19 CpGs revealed a robust correlation between epigenetic age and chronological age. Conclusions Nasonia vitripennis emerges as a promising model for investigating the epigenetics of ageing, shedding light on the intricate dynamics of DNA methylation and their implications for age-related processes. This research not only expands the repertoire of ageing models but also opens avenues for deeper exploration of epigenetic mechanisms in the context of ageing.
Background Congenital heart defects (CHD) are structural defects of the heart affecting approximately 1% of newborns. They exhibit low penetrance and non-Mendelian patterns of inheritance as varied and complex traits. While genetic factors are known to play an important role in the development of CHD, the specific genetics remain unknown for the majority of patients. To elucidate the underlying genetic risk, we performed a genome wide association study (GWAS) of CHDs in general and specific CHD subgroups using the FinnGen Release 10 (R10) (N > 393,000), followed by functional fine-mapping through eQTL and co-localization analyses using the GTEx database. Results We discovered three genome-wide significant loci associated with general CHD. Two of them were located in chromosome 17: 17q21.32 (rs2316327, intronic: LRRC37A2, Odds ratio (OR) [95% Confidence Interval (CI)] = 1.17[1.12-1.23], p = 1.5 x 10(-9)) and 17q25.3 (rs1293973611, nearest: BAHCC1, OR[95%CI] = 4.48[2.80-7.17], p = 7.0 x 10(-10)), respectively, and in addition to general CHD, the rs1293973611 locus was associated with the septal defect subtype. The third locus was in band 1p21.2 (rs35046143, nearest: PALMD, OR[95%CI] = 1.15[1.09-1.21], p = 7.1 x 10(-9)), and it was associated with general CHD and left-sided lesions. In the subgroup analysis, two additional loci were associated with septal defects (rs75230966 and rs6824295), and one with left-sided lesions (rs1305393195). In the eQTL analysis the variants rs2316327 (general CHD), and rs75230966 (septal defects) both located in 17q21.32 (with a LD r2 of 0.41) were both predicted to significantly associate with the expression of WNT9B in the atrial appendage tissue category. This effect was further confirmed by co-localization analysis, which also implicated WNT3 expression in the atrial appendage. A meta-analysis of general CHD together with the UK Biobank (combined N = 881,678) provided a different genome-wide significant locus in LRRC37A2; rs16941382 (OR[95%CI] = 1.15[1.11-1.20], p = 1.5 x 10(-9)) which is in significant LD with rs2316327. Conclusions Our results of general CHD and different CHD subcategories identified a complex risk locus on chromosome 17 near BAHCC1 and LRRC37A2, interacting with the genes WNT9B, WNT3 and MYL4, may constitute potential novel CHD risk associated loci, warranting future experimental tests to determine their role.
Pecan scab is a devastating disease that causes damage to pecan (Carya illinoinensis (Wangenh.) K. Koch) fruit and leaves. The disease is caused by the fungus Venturia effusa (G. Winter) and the main management practice for controlling the disease is by application of fungicides at 2-to-3-week intervals throughout the growing season. Besides disease-related yield loss, application of fungicides can result in considerable cost and increases the likelihood of fungicide resistance developing in the pathogen. Resistant cultivars are available for pecan growers; although, in several cases resistance has been overcome as the pathogen adapts to infect resistant hosts. Despite the importance of host resistance in scab management, there is little information regarding the molecular basis of genetic resistance to pecan scab.The purpose of this study was to elucidate mechanisms of natural pecan scab resistance by analyzing transcripts that are differentially expressed in pecan leaf samples from scab resistant and susceptible trees. The leaf samples were collected from trees in a provenance collection orchard that represents the natural range of pecan in the US and Mexico. Trees in the orchard have been exposed to natural scab infections since planting in 1989, and scab ratings were collected over three seasons. Based on this data, ten susceptible trees and ten resistant trees were selected for analysis. RNA-seq data was collected and analyzed for diseased and non-diseased parts of susceptible trees as well as for resistant trees. A total of 313 genes were found to be differentially expressed when comparing resistant and susceptible trees without disease. For susceptible samples showing scab symptoms, 1,454 genes were identified as differentially expressed compared to non-diseased susceptible samples. Many genes involved in pathogen recognition, defense responses, and signal transduction were up-regulated in diseased samples of susceptible trees, whereas differentially expressed genes in pecan scab resistant samples were generally down-regulated compared to non-diseased susceptible samples.Our results provide the first account of candidate genes involved in resistance/susceptibility to pecan scab under natural conditions in a pecan orchard. This information can be used to aid pecan breeding programs and development of biotechnology-based approaches for generating pecan cultivars with more durable scab resistance.
Background Sequencing variable regions of the 16S rRNA gene (similar or equal to 300 bp) with Illumina technology is commonly used to study the composition of human microbiota. Unfortunately, short reads are unable to differentiate between highly similar species. Considering that species from the same genus can be associated with health or disease it is important to identify them at the lowest possible taxonomic rank. Third-generation sequencing platforms such as PacBio SMRT, increase read lengths allowing to sequence the whole gene with the maximum taxonomic resolution. Despite its potential, full length 16S rRNA gene sequencing is not widely used yet. The aim of the current study was to compare the sequencing output and taxonomic annotation performance of the two approaches (Illumina short read sequencing and PacBio long read sequencing of 16S rRNA gene) in different human microbiome samples. DNA from saliva, oral biofilms (subgingival plaque) and faeces of 9 volunteers was isolated. Regions V3-V4 and V1-V9 were amplified and sequenced by Illumina Miseq and by PacBio Sequel II sequencers, respectively. Results With both platforms, a similar percentage of reads was assigned to the genus level (94.79% and 95.06% respectively) but with PacBio a higher proportion of reads were further assigned to the species level (55.23% vs 74.14%). Regarding overall bacterial composition, samples clustered by niche and not by sequencing platform. In addition, all genera with > 0.1% abundance were detected in both platforms for all types of samples. Although some genera such as Streptococcus tended to be observed at higher frequency in PacBio than in Illumina (20.14% vs 14.12% in saliva, 10.63% vs 6.59% in subgingival plaque biofilm samples) none of the differences were statistically significant when correcting for multiple testing. Conclusions The results presented in the current manuscript suggest that samples sequenced using Illumina and PacBio are mostly comparable. Considering that PacBio reads were assigned at the species level with higher accuracy than Illumina, our data support the use of PacBio technology for future microbiome studies, although a higher cost is currently required to obtain an equivalent number of reads per sample.
Background Russian wheat aphid (Diuraphis noxia Kurd.) is a severe pest to wheat, and even though resistance varieties are available to curb this pest, they are becoming obsolete with the development of new virulent aphid populations. Unlike many other aphids, D noxia only harbours a single endosymbiont, Buchnera aphidicola. Considering the importance of Buchnera, this study aimed to elucidate commonalities and dissimilarities between various hosts, to better understand its distinctiveness within its symbiotic relationship with D. noxia. To do so, the genome of the D. noxia's Buchnera was assembled and compared to those of other aphid species that feed on diverse host species.
Background Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex multifactorial disorder with a substantial genetic component. However, the clinical manifestations of PCOS are heterogeneous with notable differences between lean and obese women, implying a different pathophysiology manifesting in differential body mass index (BMI). We performed a meta-analysis of genome-wide association study (GWAS) data from six well-characterised cohorts, using a case-control study design stratified by BMI, aiming to identify genetic variants associated with lean and overweight/obese PCOS subtypes.Results The study comprised 254,588 women (5,937 cases and 248,651 controls) from individual studies performed in Australia, Estonia, Finland, the Netherlands and United States of America, and separated according to three BMI stratifications (lean, overweight and obese). Genome-wide association analyses were performed for each stratification within each cohort, with the data for each BMI group meta-analysed using METAL software. Almost half of the total study population (47%, n = 119,584) were of lean BMI (<= 25 kg/m2). Two genome-wide significant loci were identified for lean PCOS, led by rs12000707 within DENND1A (P = 1.55 x 10-12) and rs2228260 within XBP1 (P = 3.68 x 10-8). One additional locus, LINC02905, was highlighted as significantly associated with lean PCOS through gene-based analyses (P = 1.76 x 10-6). There were no significant loci observed for the overweight or obese sub-strata when analysed separately, however, when these strata were combined, an association signal led by rs569675099 within DENND1A reached genome-wide significance (P = 3.22 x 10-9) and a gene-based association was identified with ERBB4 (P = 1.59 x 10-6). Nineteen of 28 signals identified in previous GWAS, were replicated with consistent allelic effect in the lean stratum. There were less replicated signals in the overweight and obese groups, and only 4 SNPs were replicated in each of the three BMI strata.Conclusions Genetic variation at the XBP1, LINC02905 and ERBB4 loci were associated with PCOS within unique BMI strata, while DENND1A demonstrated associations across multiple strata, providing evidence of both distinct and shared genetic features between lean and overweight/obese PCOS-affected women. This study demonstrated that PCOS-affected women with contrasting body weight are not only phenotypically distinct but also show variation in genetic architecture; lean PCOS women typically display elevated gonadotrophin ratios, lower insulin resistance, higher androgen levels, including adrenal androgens, and more favourable lipid profiles. Overall, these findings add to the growing body of evidence supporting a genetic basis for PCOS as well as differences in genetic patterns relevant to PCOS BMI-subtype.
BackgroundWenchang chickens are one of the most popular local chicken breeds in the Chinese chicken industry. However, the low feed efficiency is the main shortcoming of this breed. Therefore, there is a need to find a more precise breeding method to improve the feed efficiency of Wenchang chickens. In this study, we explored important candidate genes and variants for feed efficiency and growth traits through genome-wide association study (GWAS) analysis.ResultsEstimates of genomic heritability for growth and feed efficiency traits, including residual feed intake (RFI) of 0.05, average daily food intake (ADFI) of 0.21, average daily weight gain (ADG) of 0.24, body weight (BW) at 87, 95, 104, 113 days of age (BW87, BW95, BW104 and BW113) ranged from 0.30 to 0.44. Important candidate genes related to feed efficiency and growth traits were identified, such as PLCE1, LAP3, MED28, QDPR, LDB2 and SEL1L3 genes.ConclusionThe results identified important candidate genes for feed efficiency and growth traits in Wenchang chickens and provide a theoretical basis for the development of new molecular breeding technology.
Background Previously, a novel multiplex system of 64 loci was constructed based on capillary electrophoresis platform, including 59 autosomal insertion/deletions (A-InDels), two Y-chromosome InDels, two mini short tandem repeats (miniSTRs), and an Amelogenin gene. The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficiencies of this multiplex system for individual identification, paternity testing and biogeographic ancestry inference in Chinese Hezhou Han (CHH) and Hubei Tujia (CTH) groups, providing valuable insights for forensic anthropology and population genetics research.Results The cumulative values of power of discrimination (CDP) and probability of exclusion (CPE) for the 59 A-InDels and two miniSTRs were 0.99999999999999999999999999754, 0.99999905; and 0.99999999999999999999999999998, 0.99999898 in CTH and CHH groups, respectively. When the likelihood ratio thresholds were set to 1 or 10, more than 95% of the full sibling pairs could be identified from unrelated individual pairs, and the false positive rates were less than 1.2% in both CTH and CHH groups. Biogeographic ancestry inference models based on 35 populations were constructed with three algorithms: random forest, adaptive boosting and extreme gradient boosting, and then 10-fold cross-validation analyses were applied to test these three models with the average accuracies of 86.59%, 84.22% and 87.80%, respectively. In addition, we also investigated the genetic relationships between the two studied groups with 33 reference populations using population statistical methods of F ST, D A, phylogenetic tree, PCA, STRUCTURE and TreeMix analyses. The present results showed that compared to other continental populations, the CTH and CHH groups had closer genetic affinities to East Asian populations.Conclusions This novel multiplex system has high CDP and CPE in CTH and CHH groups, which can be used as a powerful tool for individual identification and paternity testing. According to various genetic analysis methods, the genetic structures of CTH and CHH groups are relatively similar to the reference East Asian populations.
Microbial remediation of heavy metal polluted environment is ecofriendly and cost effective. Therefore, in the present study, Shewanella putrefaciens stain 4H was previously isolated by our group from the activated sludge of secondary sedimentation tank in a dyeing wastewater treatment plant. The bacterium was able to reduce chromate effectively. The strains showed significant ability to reduce Cr(VI) in the pH range of 8.0 to 10.0 (optimum pH 9.0) and 25-42degree celsius (optimum 30 degree celsius) and were able to reduce 300 mg/L of Cr(VI) in 72 h under parthenogenetic anaerobic conditions. In this paper, the complete genome sequence was obtained by Nanopore sequencing technology and analyzed chromium metabolism-related genes by comparative genomics The genomic sequence of S. putrefaciens 4H has a length of 4,631,110 bp with a G + C content of 44.66% and contains 4015 protein-coding genes and 3223, 2414, 2343 genes were correspondingly annotated into the COG, KEGG, and GO databases. The qRT-PCR analysis showed that the expression of chrA, mtrC, and undA genes was up-regulated under Cr(VI) stress. This study explores the Chromium Metabolism-Related Genes of S. putrefaciens 4H and will help to deepen our understanding of the mechanisms of Cr(VI) tolerance and reduction in this strain, thus contributing to the better application of S. putrefaciens 4H in the field of remediation of chromium-contaminated environments.
BackgroundCassava is one of three major potato crops and the sixth most important food crop globally. Improving yield remains a primary aim in cassava breeding. Notably, plant height significantly impacts the yield and quality of crops; however, the mechanisms underlying cassava plant height development are yet to be elucidated.ResultsIn this study, we investigated the mechanisms responsible for cassava plant height development using phenotypic, anatomical, and transcriptomic analyses. Phenotypic and anatomical analysis revealed that compared to the high-stem cassava cultivar, the dwarf-stem cassava cultivar exhibited a significant reduction in plant height and a notable increase in internode tissue xylem area. Meanwhile, physiological analysis demonstrated that the lignin content of dwarf cassava was significantly higher than that of high cassava. Notably, transcriptome analysis of internode tissues identified several differentially expressed genes involved in cell wall synthesis and expansion, plant hormone signal transduction, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, and flavonoid biosynthesis between the two cassava cultivars.ConclusionsOur findings suggest that internode tissue cell division, secondary wall lignification, and hormone-related gene expression play important roles in cassava plant height development. Ultimately, this study provides new insights into the mechanisms of plant height morphogenesis in cassava and identifies candidate regulatory genes associated with plant height that can serve as valuable genetic resources for future crop dwarfing breeding.
BackgroundContinuously growing teeth are an important innovation in mammalian evolution, yet genetic regulation of continuous growth by stem cells remains incompletely understood. Dental stem cells responsible for tooth crown growth are lost at the onset of tooth root formation. Genetic signaling that initiates this loss is difficult to study with the ever-growing incisor and rooted molars of mice, the most common mammalian dental model species, because signals for root formation overlap with signals that pattern tooth size and shape (i.e., cusp patterns). Bank and prairie voles (Cricetidae, Rodentia, Glires) have evolved rooted and unrooted molars while retaining similar size and shape, providing alternative models for studying roots.ResultsWe assembled a de novo genome of Myodes glareolus, a vole with high-crowned, rooted molars, and performed genomic and transcriptomic analyses in a broad phylogenetic context of Glires (rodents and lagomorphs) to assess differential selection and evolution in tooth forming genes. Bulk transcriptomics comparisons of embryonic molar development between bank voles and mice demonstrated overall conservation of gene expression levels, with species-specific differences corresponding to the accelerated and more extensive patterning of the vole molar. We leverage convergent evolution of unrooted molars across the clade to examine changes that may underlie the evolution of unrooted molars. We identified 15 dental genes with changing synteny relationships and six dental genes undergoing positive selection across Glires, two of which were undergoing positive selection in species with unrooted molars, Dspp and Aqp1. Decreased expression of both genes in prairie voles with unrooted molars compared to bank voles supports the presence of positive selection and may underlie differences in root formation.ConclusionsOur results support ongoing evolution of dental genes across Glires and identify candidate genes for mechanistic studies of root formation. Comparative research using the bank vole as a model species can reveal the complex evolutionary background of convergent evolution for ever-growing molars.
Background Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a complex disorder that has become a high prevalence global health problem, with diabetes being its predominant pathophysiologic driver. Autosomal genetic variation only explains some of the predisposition to kidney disease. Variations in the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) and nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes (NEMG) are implicated in susceptibility to kidney disease and CKD progression, but they have not been thoroughly explored. Our aim was to investigate the association of variation in both mtDNA and NEMG with CKD (and related traits), with a particular focus on diabetes.Methods We used the UK Biobank (UKB) and UK-ROI, an independent collection of individuals with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) patients.Results Fourteen mitochondrial variants were associated with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) in UKB. Mitochondrial variants and haplogroups U, H and J were associated with eGFR and serum variables. Mitochondrial haplogroup H was associated with all the serum variables regardless of the presence of diabetes. Mitochondrial haplogroup X was associated with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in UKB. We confirmed the influence of several known NEMG on kidney disease and function and found novel associations for SLC39A13, CFL1, ACP2 or ATP5G1 with serum variables and kidney damage, and for SLC4A1, NUP210 and MYH14 with ESKD. The G allele of TBC1D32-rs113987180 was associated with higher risk of ESKD in patients with diabetes (OR:9.879; CI95%:4.440-21.980; P = 2.0E-08). In UK-ROI, AGXT2-rs71615838 and SURF1-rs183853102 were associated with diabetic nephropathies, and TFB1M-rs869120 with eGFR.Conclusions We identified novel variants both in mtDNA and NEMG which may explain some of the missing heritability for CKD and kidney phenotypes. We confirmed the role of MT-ND5 and mitochondrial haplogroup H on renal disease (serum variables), and identified the MT-ND5-rs41535848G variant, along with mitochondrial haplogroup X, associated with higher risk of ESKD. Despite most of the associations were independent of diabetes, we also showed potential roles for NEMG in T1DM.
Background We recently developed two high-resolution methods for genome-wide mapping of two prominent types of DNA damage, single-strand DNA breaks (SSBs) and abasic (AP) sites and found highly complex and non-random patterns of these lesions in mammalian genomes. One salient feature of SSB and AP sites was the existence of single-nucleotide hotspots for both lesions.Results In this work, we show that SSB hotspots are enriched in the immediate vicinity of transcriptional start sites (TSSs) in multiple normal mammalian tissues, however the magnitude of enrichment varies significantly with tissue type and appears to be limited to a subset of genes. SSB hotspots around TSSs are enriched on the template strand and associate with higher expression of the corresponding genes. Interestingly, SSB hotspots appear to be at least in part generated by the base-excision repair (BER) pathway from the AP sites.Conclusions Our results highlight complex relationship between DNA damage and regulation of gene expression and suggest an exciting possibility that SSBs at TSSs might function as sensors of DNA damage to activate genes important for DNA damage response.
The over 4,100 species of bird lice are classified into 214 genera in the parvorders Amblycera and Ischnocera. Congeneric species of bird lice usually share much similarity in morphology and in mitochondrial (mt) genome organization. Two recent studies, however, reported substantial intra-genus variation in mt genome organization in bird lice. Both the ancestral single-chromosome mt genome and a fragmented mt genome with two or three minichromosomes were observed in the genera Austromenopon and Laemobothrion. To better understand intra-genus variation in mt genome organization, we sequenced the complete mt genome of the white spoonbill louse Ibidoecus plataleae and compared it with that of the glossy ibis feather louse Ibidoecus bisignatus reported previously. We found that I. plataleae had a fragmented mt genome with 12 minichromosomes; each minichromosome was 2,798 to 3,628 bp in size and had 2 to 6 genes. This is in stark contrast to the mt genome of I. bisignatus, which has all genes on a single chromosome, 14,909 bp in size. This is the most drastic intra-genus variation in mt genome organization observed to date in animals, indicating an unprecedented rapid process of mt genome fragmentation in the genus Ibidoecus. The divergence time between I. plataleae and I. bisignatus is currently unknown but is estimated to be less than 23 million years. Either many minichromosal split events occurred after I. plataleae diverged from I. bisignatus, or one minichromosome splits into multiple minichromosomes in a single event. Sequencing and comparing more Ibidoecusi species will help understand the unusual mt genome fragmentation in this genus.
Background Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) hold significant importance in biology, with precise PPI prediction as a pivotal factor in comprehending cellular processes and facilitating drug design. However, experimental determination of PPIs is laborious, time-consuming, and often constrained by technical limitations.Methods We introduce a new node representation method based on initial information fusion, called FFANE, which amalgamates PPI networks and protein sequence data to enhance the precision of PPIs' prediction. A Gaussian kernel similarity matrix is initially established by leveraging protein structural resemblances. Concurrently, protein sequence similarities are gauged using the Levenshtein distance, enabling the capture of diverse protein attributes. Subsequently, to construct an initial information matrix, these two feature matrices are merged by employing weighted fusion to achieve an organic amalgamation of structural and sequence details. To gain a more profound understanding of the amalgamated features, a Stacked Autoencoder (SAE) is employed for encoding learning, thereby yielding more representative feature representations. Ultimately, classification models are trained to predict PPIs by using the well-learned fusion feature.Results When employing 5-fold cross-validation experiments on SVM, our proposed method achieved average accuracies of 94.28%, 97.69%, and 84.05% in terms of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Homo sapiens, and Helicobacter pylori datasets, respectively.Conclusion Experimental findings across various authentic datasets validate the efficacy and superiority of this fusion feature representation approach, underscoring its potential value in bioinformatics.
Background Whole-genome duplication and long terminal repeat retrotransposons (LTR-RTs) amplification in organisms are essential factors that affect speciation, local adaptation, and diversification of organisms. Understanding the karyotype projection and LTR-RTs amplification could contribute to untangling evolutionary history. This study compared the karyotype and LTR-RTs evolution in the genomes of eight oaks, a dominant lineage in Northern Hemisphere forests.Results Karyotype projections showed that chromosomal evolution was relatively conservative in oaks, especially on chromosomes 1 and 7. Modern oak chromosomes formed through multiple fusions, fissions, and rearrangements after an ancestral triplication event. Species-specific chromosomal rearrangements revealed fragments preserved through natural selection and adaptive evolution. A total of 441,449 full-length LTR-RTs were identified from eight oak genomes, and the number of LTR-RTs for oaks from section Cyclobalanopsis was larger than in other sections. Recent amplification of the species-specific LTR-RTs lineages resulted in significant variation in the abundance and composition of LTR-RTs among oaks. The LTR-RTs insertion suppresses gene expression, and the suppressed intensity in gene regions was larger than in promoter regions. Some centromere and rearrangement regions indicated high-density peaks of LTR/Copia and LTR/Gypsy. Different centromeric regional repeat units (32, 78, 79 bp) were detected on different Q. glauca chromosomes.Conclusion Chromosome fusions and arm exchanges contribute to the formation of oak karyotypes. The composition and abundance of LTR-RTs are affected by its recent amplification. LTR-RTs random retrotransposition suppresses gene expression and is enriched in centromere and chromosomal rearrangement regions. This study provides novel insights into the evolutionary history of oak karyotypes and the organization, amplification, and function of LTR-RTs.
Background The early 2 factor (E2F) family is characterized as a kind of transcription factor that plays an important role in cell division, DNA damage repair, and cell size regulation. However, its stress response has not been well revealed. Results In this study, ZmE2F members were comprehensively identified in the maize genome, and 21 ZmE2F genes were identified, including eight E2F subclade members, seven DEL subfamily genes, and six DP genes. All ZmE2F proteins possessed the DNA-binding domain (DBD) characterized by conserved motif 1 with the RRIYD sequence. The ZmE2F genes were unevenly distributed on eight maize chromosomes, showed diversity in gene structure, expanded by gene duplication, and contained abundant stress-responsive elements in their promoter regions. Subsequently, the ZmE2F6 gene was cloned and functionally verified in drought response. The results showed that the ZmE2F6 protein interacted with ZmPP2C26, localized in the nucleus, and responded to drought treatment. The overexpression of ZmE2F6 enhanced drought tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis with longer root length, higher survival rate, and biomass by upregulating stress-related gene transcription. Conclusions This study provides novel insights into a greater understanding and functional study of the E2F family in the stress response.
Background Apoptosis is involved (directly and indirectly) in several physiological processes including tissue remodeling during the development, the turnover of immune cells, and a defense against harmful stimuli. The disordered apoptotic process participates in the pathogenesis of various diseases, such as neoplasms, and chronic inflammatory or systemic autoimmune diseases, which are associated with its inadequate regulation. Caspases are vital components of the apoptotic pathway that are involved in developmental and immune processes. However, genome-wide identification and functional analysis of caspase have not been conducted in Mytilus coruscus, which is an economically important bivalve. Results Here, 47 caspase genes were identified from the genomes of M. coruscus, and the expansion of caspase-2/9 and caspase-3/6/7 genes were observed. Tandem duplication acts as an essential driver of gene expansion. The expanded caspase genes were highly diverse in terms of sequence, domain structure, and spatiotemporal expression profiles, suggesting their functional differentiation. The high expression of the expanded caspase genes at the pediveliger larvae stage and the result of apoptosis location in the velum suggest that the apoptosis mediated by them plays a critical role in the metamorphosis of M. coruscus larvae. In gill, caspase genes respond differently to the challenge of different strains, and most caspase-2/9 and caspase-3/6/7 genes were induced by copper stress, whereas caspase-8/10 genes were suppressed. Additionally, most caspase genes were upregulated in the mantle under ocean acidification which could weaken the biomineralization capacity of the mantle tissue. Conclusions These results provide a comprehensive overview of the evolution and function of the caspase family and enhanced the understanding of the biological function of caspases in M. coruscus larval development and response to biotic and abiotic challenges.
Background While numerous allergy-related biomarkers and targeted treatment strategies have been developed and employed, there are still signifcant limitations and challenges in the early diagnosis and targeted treatment for allegic diseases. Our study aims to identify circulating proteins causally associated with allergic disease-related traits through Mendelian randomization (MR)-based analytical framework.Methods Large-scale cis-MR was employed to estimate the effects of thousands of plasma proteins on five main allergic diseases. Additional analyses including MR Steiger analyzing and Bayesian colocalisation, were performed to test the robustness of the associations; These findings were further validated utilizing meta-analytical methods in the replication analysis. Both proteome- and transcriptome-wide association studies approach was applied, and then, a protein-protein interaction was conducted to examine the interplay between the identified proteins and the targets of existing medications.Results Eleven plasma proteins were identified with links to atopic asthma (AA), atopic dermatitis (AD), and allergic rhinitis (AR). Subsequently, these proteins were classified into four distinct target groups, with a focus on tier 1 and 2 targets due to their higher potential to become drug targets. MR analysis and extra validation revealed STAT6 and TNFRSF6B to be Tier 1 and IL1RL2 and IL6R to be Tier 2 proteins with the potential for AA treatment. Two Tier 1 proteins, CRAT and TNFRSF6B, and five Tier 2 proteins, ERBB3, IL6R, MMP12, ICAM1, and IL1RL2, were linked to AD, and three Tier 2 proteins, MANF, STAT6, and TNFSF8, to AR.Conclusion Eleven Tier 1 and 2 protein targets that are promising drug target candidates were identified for AA, AD, and AR, which influence the development of allergic diseases and expose new diagnostic and therapeutic targets.
Background The genotype-by-environment interaction (GxE) in beef cattle can be investigated using reaction norm models to assess environmental sensitivity and, combined with genome-wide association studies (GWAS), to map genomic regions related to animal adaptation. Including genetic markers from whole-genome sequencing in reaction norm (RN) models allows us to identify high-resolution candidate genes across environmental gradients through GWAS. Hence, we performed a GWAS via the RN approach using whole-genome sequencing data, focusing on mapping candidate genes associated with the expression of reproductive and growth traits in Nellore cattle. For this purpose, we used phenotypic data for age at first calving (AFC), scrotal circumference (SC), post-weaning weight gain (PWG), and yearling weight (YW). A total of 20,000 males and 7,159 females genotyped with 770k were imputed to the whole sequence (29 M). After quality control and linkage disequilibrium (LD) pruning, there remained similar to 2.41 M SNPs for SC, PWG, and YW and similar to 5.06 M SNPs for AFC.Results Significant SNPs were identified on Bos taurus autosomes (BTA) 10, 11, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25 and 27 for AFC and on BTA 4, 5 and 8 for SC. For growth traits, significant SNP markers were identified on BTA 3, 5 and 20 for YW and PWG. A total of 56 positional candidate genes were identified for AFC, 9 for SC, 3 for PWG, and 24 for YW. The significant SNPs detected for the reaction norm coefficients in Nellore cattle were found to be associated with growth, adaptative, and reproductive traits. These candidate genes are involved in biological mechanisms related to lipid metabolism, immune response, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway, and energy and phosphate metabolism.Conclusions GWAS results highlighted differences in the physiological processes linked to lipid metabolism, immune response, MAPK signaling pathway, and energy and phosphate metabolism, providing insights into how different environmental conditions interact with specific genes affecting animal adaptation, productivity, and reproductive performance. The shared genomic regions between the intercept and slope are directly implicated in the regulation of growth and reproductive traits in Nellore cattle raised under different environmental conditions.
BackgroundMilk is essential for mammalian nutrition because it provides vital nutrients for growth and development. Milk composition, which is influenced by genetic and environmental factors, supports lactation, a complex process crucial for milk production and quality. Recent research has focused on noncoding RNAs, particularly microRNAs (miRNAs), which are present in body fluids and regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally. This study comprehensively characterizes miRNAs in milk of four livestock species, namely Bubalus bubalis, Capra hircus, Equus asinus, and Ovis aries and identifies potential target genes.ResultsHigh-throughput sequencing of milk RNA resulted in distinct read counts across species: B. bubalis (8,790,441 reads), C. hircus (12,976,275 reads), E. asinus (9,385,067 reads), and O. aries (7,295,297 reads). E. asinus had the highest RNA mapping rate (94.6%) and O. aries the lowest (84.8%). A substantially greater proportion of miRNAs over other small RNAs was observed for the donkey milk sample (7.74%) compared to buffalo (0.87%), goat (1.57%), and sheep (1.12%). Shared miRNAs, which included miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, and miR-23a among others, showed varying expression levels across species, confirmed by qPCR analysis. Functional annotation of predicted miRNA target genes highlighted diverse roles, with an enrichment in functions linked to metabolism and immunity. Pathway analysis identified immune response pathways as significant, with several miRNAs targeting specific genes across species, suggesting their regulatory function in milk.ConclusionsBoth conserved and species-specific miRNAs were detected in milk of the investigated species. The identified target genes of these miRNAs have important roles in neonatal development, adaptation, growth, and immune response. Furthermore, they influence milk and meat production traits in livestock.
Background Sperm storage capacity (SSC) determines the duration of fertility in hens and is an important reproduction trait that cannot be ignored in production. Currently, the genetic mechanism of SSC is still unclear in hens. Therefore, to explore the genetic basis of SSC, we analyzed the uterus-vagina junction (UVJ) of hens with different SSC at different times after insemination by RNA-seq and Ribo-seq.Results Our results showed that 589, 596, and 527 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 730, 783, and 324 differentially translated genes (DTGs), and 804, 625, and 467 differential translation efficiency genes (DTEGs) were detected on the 5th, 10th, and 15th days after insemination, respectively. In transcription levels, we found that the differences of SSC at different times after insemination were mainly reflected in the transmission of information between cells, the composition of intercellular adhesion complexes, the regulation of ion channels, the regulation of cellular physiological activities, the composition of cells, and the composition of cell membranes. In translation efficiency (TE) levels, the differences of SSC were mainly related to the physiological and metabolic activities in the cell, the composition of the organelle membrane, the physiological activities of oxidation, cell components, and cell growth processes. According to pathway analysis, SSC was related to neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, histidine metabolism, and PPAR signaling pathway at the transcriptional level and glutathione metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, calcium signaling pathway, cell adhesion molecules, galactose metabolism, and Wnt signaling pathway at the TE level. We screened candidate genes affecting SSC at transcriptional levels (COL4A4, MUC6, MCHR2, TACR1, AVPR1A, COL1A1, HK2, RB1, VIPR2, HMGCS2) and TE levels(COL4A4, MUC6, CYCS, NDUFA13, CYTB, RRM2, CAMK4, HRH2, LCT, GCK, GALT). Among them, COL4A4 and MUC6 were the key candidate genes differing in transcription, translation, and translation efficiency.Conclusions Our study used the combined analysis of RNA-seq and Ribo-seq for the first time to investigate the SSC and reveal the physiological processes associated with SSC. The key candidate genes affecting SSC were screened, and the theoretical basis was provided for the analysis of the molecular regulation mechanism of SSC.
BackgroundXinglong buffalo, as an indigenous breed in Hainan province of China, possesses characteristics such as high humidity tolerance, disease resistance and high reproductive capacity. Combined with whole genome sequencing technology, comprehensive investigation can be undertaken to elucidate the genomic characteristics, functions and genetic variation of Xinglong buffalo population.ResultsXinglong buffalo has the highest genetic diversity, lowest runs of homozygosity average length, and fasted decay of linkage disequilibrium in our study population. Phylogenetic tree results revealed that Xinglong buffalo was gathered together with Fuzhong buffalo firstly. The population genetic structure analysis indicates that at K = 3, the Xinglong buffalo for the first time showed a distinct ancestral origin from other water buffalo. Furthermore, compared to different populations, candidate genes displaying significantly distinct patterns of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (e.g., RYR2, COX15, PCDH9, DTWD2, FCRL5) distribution have been identified in the Xinglong buffalo.ConclusionsBased on the whole genome sequencing data, this study identified a substantial number of SNPs and assessed the genetic diversity and selection signatures within the Xinglong buffalo population. These results contribute to understanding the genomic characteristics of Xinglong buffalo and their genetic evolutionary status. However, the practical significance of these signatures for genetic enhancement still requires confirmation through additional samples and further experimental validation.
BackgroundIn cold and temperate zones, seasonal reproduction plays a crucial role in the survival and reproductive success of species. The photoperiod influences reproductive processes in seasonal breeders through the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis, in which the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) serves as the central region responsible for transmitting light information to the endocrine system. However, the cis-regulatory elements and the transcriptional activation mechanisms related to seasonal activation of the reproductive axis in MBH remain largely unclear. In this study, an artificial photoperiod program was used to induce the HPG axis activation in male quails, and we compared changes in chromatin accessibility changes during the seasonal activation of the HPG axis.ResultsAlterations in chromatin accessibility occurred in the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) and stabilized at LD7 during the activation of the HPG axis. Most open chromatin regions (OCRs) are enriched mainly in introns and distal intergenic regions. The differentially accessible regions (DARs) showed enrichment of binding motifs of the RFX, NKX, and MEF family of transcription factors that gained-loss accessibility under long-day conditions, while the binding motifs of the nuclear receptor (NR) superfamily and BZIP family gained-open accessibility. Retinoic acid signaling and GTPase-mediated signal transduction are involved in adaptation to long days and maintenance of the HPG axis activation. According to our footprint analysis, three clock-output genes (TEF, DBP, and HLF) and the THRA were the first responders to long days in LD3. THRB, NR3C2, AR, and NR3C1 are the key players associated with the initiation and maintenance of the activation of the HPG axis, which appeared at LD7 and tended to be stable under long-day conditions. By integrating chromatin and the transcriptome, three genes (DIO2, SLC16A2, and PDE6H) involved in thyroid hormone signaling showed differential chromatin accessibility and expression levels during the seasonal activation of the HPG axis. TRPA1, a target of THRB identified by DAP-seq, was sensitive to photoactivation and exhibited differential expression levels between short- and long-day conditions.ConclusionOur data suggest that trans effects were the main factors affecting gene expression during the seasonal activation of the HPG axis. This study could lead to further research on the seasonal reproductive behavior of birds, particularly the role of MBH in controlling seasonal reproductive behavior.
BackgroundMutton quality is closely related to genetic variants and gene expression alterations during growth and development, resulting in differences in nutritional values, flavor, and odor.ResultsWe first evaluated and compared the composition of crude protein, crude fat, cholesterol, amino acid (AA), and fatty acid (FA) in the longissimus dorsi muscle of Guizhou black goats (GZB, n = 5) and Yunshang black goats (YBG, n = 6). The contents of cholesterol and FA related to odor in GZB were significantly lower than that in YBG, while the concentrations of umami amino acids and intramuscular fat were significantly higher in GZB. Furthermore, structural variants (SVs) in the genomes of GZB (n = 30) and YBG (n = 11) were explored. It was found that some regions in Chr 10/12/18 were densely involved with a large number of SVs in the genomes of GZB and YBG. By setting FST >= 0.25, we got 837 stratified SVs, of which 25 SVs (involved in 12 genes, e.g., CORO1A, CLIC6, PCSK2, and TMEM9) were limited in GZB. Functional enrichment analysis of 14 protein-coding genes (e.g., ENPEP, LIPC, ABCA5, and SLC6A15) revealed multiple terms and pathways related with metabolisms of AA, FA, and cholesterol. The SVs (n = 10) obtained by the whole genome resequencing were confirmed in percentages of 36.67 to 86.67% (n = 96) by PCR method. The SVa and SVd polymorphisms indicated a moderate negative correlation with HMGCS1 activity (n = 17).ConclusionThis study is the first to comprehensively reveal potential SVs related to mutton nutritional values, flavor, and odor based on genomic compare between two black goat breeds with closely genetic relationship. The SVs generated in this study provide a data resource for deeper studies to understand the genomic characteristics and possible evolutionary outcomes with better nutritional values, flavor and extremely light odor.
BackgroundGuizhou black goat is one of the indigenous black goat breeds in the southwest region of Guizhou, China, which is an ordinary goat for mutton production. They are characterized by moderate body size, black coat, favorite meat quality with tender meat and lower odor, and tolerance for cold and crude feed. However, little is known about the genetic characteristics or variations underlying their important economic traits.ResultsHere, we resequenced the whole genome of Guizhou black goat from 30 unrelated individuals breeding in the five core farms. A total of 9,835,610 SNPs were detected, and 2,178,818 SNPs were identified specifically in this breed. The population structure analysis revealed that Guizhou black goat shared a common ancestry with Shaanbei white cashmere goat (0.146), Yunshang black goat (0.103), Iran indigenous goat (0.054), and Moroccan goat (0.002). However, Guizhou black goat showed relatively higher genetic diversity and a lower level of linkage disequilibrium than the other seven goat breeds by the analysis of the nucleotide diversity, linkage disequilibrium decay, and runs of homozygosity. Based on FST and theta pi values, we identified 645, 813, and 804 selected regions between Guizhou black goat and Yunshang black goat, Iran indigenous goat, and cashmere goats. Combined with the results of XP-EHH, there were 286, 322, and 359 candidate genes, respectively. Functional annotation analysis revealed that these genes are potentially responsible for the immune response (e.g., CD28, CD274, IL1A, TLR2, and SLC25A31), humility-cold resistance (e.g., HBEGF, SOSTDC1, ARNT, COL4A1/2, and EP300), meat quality traits (e.g., CHUK, GAB2, PLAAT3, and EP300), growth (e.g., GAB2, DPYD, and CSF1), fertility (e.g., METTL15 and MEI1), and visual function (e.g., PANK2 and NMNAT2) in Guizhou black goat.ConclusionOur results indicated that Guizhou black goat had a high level of genomic diversity and a low level of linkage disequilibrium in the whole genome. Selection signatures were detected in the genomic regions that were mainly related to growth and development, meat quality, reproduction, disease resistance, and humidity-cold resistance in Guizhou black goat. These results would provide a basis for further resource protection and breeding improvement of this very local breed.
Background Disease can drastically impair common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) production. Anthracnose, caused by the fungal pathogen Colletotrichum lindemuthianum (Sacc. and Magnus) Briosi and Cavara, is one of the diseases that are widespread and cause serious economic loss in common bean. Results Transcriptome analysis of the early response of common bean to anthracnose was performed using two resistant genotypes, Hongyundou and Honghuayundou, and one susceptible genotype, Jingdou. A total of 9,825 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) responding to pathogen infection and anthracnose resistance were identified by differential expression analysis. By using weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA), 2,051 DEGs were found to be associated with two resistance-related modules. Among them, 463 DEGs related to anthracnose resistance were considered resistance-related candidate genes. Nineteen candidate genes were coexpressed with three resistance genes, Phvul.001G243600, Phvul.001G243700 and Phvul.001G243800. To further identify resistance genes, 46 candidate genes were selected for experimental validation using salicylic acid (SA) and methyl jasmonate (MeJA). The results indicated that 38 candidate genes that responded to SA/MeJA treatment may be involved in anthracnose resistance in common bean. Conclusions This study identified 38 resistance-related candidate genes involved in the early response of common bean, and 19 resistance-related candidate genes were coexpressed with anthracnose resistance genes. This study identified putative resistance genes for further resistance genetic investigation and provides an important reference for anthracnose resistance breeding in common bean.
Background Previous studies have demonstrated the role of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) RNA methylation in various biological processes, our research is the first to elucidate its specific impact on LCAT mRNA stability and adipogenesis in poultry. Results The 6 100-day-old female chickens were categorized into high (n = 3) and low-fat chickens (n = 3) based on their abdominal fat ratios, and their abdominal fat tissues were processed for MeRIP-seq and RNA-seq. An integrated analysis of MeRIP-seq and RNA-seq omics data revealed 16 differentially expressed genes associated with to differential m(6)A modifications. Among them, ELOVL fatty acid elongase 2 (ELOVL2), pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), fatty acid binding protein 9 (PMP2), fatty acid binding protein 1 (FABP1), lysosomal associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3), lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) and solute carrier family 2 member 1 (SLC2A1) have ever been reported to be associated with adipogenesis. Interestingly, LCAT was down-regulated and expressed along with decreased levels of mRNA methylation methylation in the low-fat group. Mechanistically, the highly expressed ALKBH5 gene regulates LCAT RNA demethylation and affects LCAT mRNA stability. In addition, LCAT inhibits preadipocyte proliferation and promotes preadipocyte differentiation, and plays a key role in adipogenesis. Conclusions In conclusion, ALKBH5 mediates RNA stability of LCAT through demethylation and affects chicken adipogenesis. This study provides a theoretical basis for further understanding of RNA methylation regulation in chicken adipogenesis.
Background Cassava mosaic disease (CMD), caused by Sri Lankan cassava mosaic virus (SLCMV) infection, has been identified as a major pernicious disease in Manihot esculenta Crantz (cassava) plantations. It is widespread in Southeast Asia, especially in Thailand, which is one of the main cassava supplier countries. With the aim of restricting the spread of SLCMV, we explored the gene expression of a tolerant cassava cultivar vs. a susceptible cassava cultivar from the perspective of transcriptional regulation and the mechanisms underlying plant immunity and adaptation. Results Transcriptomic analysis of SLCMV-infected tolerant (Kasetsart 50 [KU 50]) and susceptible (Rayong 11 [R 11]) cultivars at three infection stages-that is, at 21 days post-inoculation (dpi) (early/asymptomatic), 32 dpi (middle/recovery), and 67 dpi (late infection/late recovery)-identified 55,699 expressed genes. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between SLCMV-infected KU 50 and R 11 cultivars at (i) 21 dpi to 32 dpi (the early to middle stage), and (ii) 32 dpi to 67 dpi (the middle stage to late stage) were then identified and validated by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). DEGs among different infection stages represent genes that respond to and regulate the viral infection during specific stages. The transcriptomic comparison between the tolerant and susceptible cultivars highlighted the role of gene expression regulation in tolerant and susceptible phenotypes. Conclusions This study identified genes involved in epigenetic modification, transcription and transcription factor activities, plant defense and oxidative stress response, gene expression, hormone- and metabolite-related pathways, and translation and translational initiation activities, particularly in KU 50 which represented the tolerant cultivar in this study.
Background Viperin, also known as radical S-adenosyl-methionine domain containing protein 2 (RSAD2), is an interferon-inducible protein that is involved in the innate immune response against a wide array of viruses. In mammals, Viperin exerts its antiviral function through enzymatic conversion of cytidine triphosphate (CTP) into its antiviral analog ddhCTP as well as through interactions with host proteins involved in innate immune signaling and in metabolic pathways exploited by viruses during their life cycle. However, how Viperin modulates the antiviral response in fish remains largely unknown. Results For this purpose, we developed a fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas) clonal cell line in which the unique viperin gene has been knocked out by CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing. In order to decipher the contribution of fish Viperin to the antiviral response and its regulatory role beyond the scope of the innate immune response, we performed a comparative RNA-seq analysis of viperin-/- and wildtype cell lines upon stimulation with recombinant fathead minnow type I interferon. Conclusions Our results revealed that Viperin does not exert positive feedback on the canonical type I IFN but acts as a negative regulator of the inflammatory response by downregulating specific pro-inflammatory genes and upregulating repressors of the NF-kappa B pathway. It also appeared to play a role in regulating metabolic processes, including one carbon metabolism, bone formation, extracellular matrix organization and cell adhesion.
BackgroundIn recent years, the total production of mud crab Scylla paramamosain has been declining, and the breeding areas are faced with land shortage and shortage of breeding production, which needs to be solved urgently. S. paramamosain can survive and grow in a wide range of salinities is an excellent variety suitable for saline-alkali water aquaculture. As a species with high economic value and strong adaptability to the environment, its cultivation under low salt conditions can not only improve the utilization efficiency of saline-alkali land, but also provide new possibilities for the sustainable development of aquaculture.ResultsA total of 248 different metabolites were identified by LC/GC-MS in the intestinal tract of S. paramamosain. These different metabolites were mainly concentrated in 'Lipids and lips-like molecules'. Among them, 112 metabolites are upregulated, and among these upregulated metabolites are mainly 'Fatty Acyls' and 'Glycerophospholipids'. The upregulation of these metabolites indicates an increase in lipid storage of S. paramamosain, which may increase the resistance of S. paramamosain to adverse environmental stress. Among them, 136 metabolic differentiates were down-regulated, mainly 'Carboxylic acids and derivatives'. The down-regulation of these organic acids may indicate that organic acids are used as energy sources for the immune response to long-term environmental stress.ConclusionUnder long-term chloride type low-salt saline-alkali water stress, S. paramamosain will shift to another homeostasis for development.
The testes are the organs of gamete production and testosterone synthesis. Up to date, no model system is available for mammalian testicular development, and only few studies have characterized the mouse testis transcriptome from no more than three postnatal ages. To describe the transcriptome landscape of the developing mouse testis and identify the potential molecular mechanisms underlying testis maturation, we examined multiple RNA-seq data of mouse testes from 3-week-old (puberty) to 11-week-old (adult). Sperm cells appeared as expected in 5-week-old mouse testis, suggesting the proper sample collection. The principal components analysis revealed the genes from 3w to 4w clustered away from other timepoints, indicating they may be the important nodes for testicular development. The pairwise comparisons at two adjacent timepoints identified 7,612 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), resulting in 58 unique mRNA expression patterns. Enrichment analysis identified functions in tissue morphogenesis (3-4w), regulation of peptidase activity (4-5w), spermatogenesis (7-8w), and antigen processing (10-11w), suggesting distinct functions in different developmental periods. 50 hub genes and 10 gene cluster modules were identified in the testis maturation process by protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis, and the miRNA-lncRNA-mRNA, miRNA-circRNA-mRNA and miRNA-circRNA-lncRNA-mRNA competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) networks were constructed. The results suggest that testis maturation is a complex developmental process modulated by various molecules, and that some potential RNA-RNA interactions may be involved in specific developmental stages. In summary, this study provides an update on the molecular basis of testis development, which may help to understand the molecular mechanisms of mouse testis development and provide guidance for mouse reproduction.
Background Lodging, a crucial agronomic trait linked to soybean yield, poses a significant challenge in soybean production. Nevertheless, there has been less research on soybean lodging compared to other important agronomic traits, hindering progress in breeding high-yield soybeans. Our goals were to investigate lodging, pinpoint quantitative trait loci (QTL) linked to lodging, and forecast potential candidate genes linked to this trait. To achieve this, we employed a recombinant inbred line (RIL) population derived from a cross between Guizao 1 and B13 (GB) across various environments. Results The lodging score of the RIL population was found to be significantly positively correlated with flowering time, maturity time, plant height, number of main stem nodes, stem diameter, and internode length, with correlation coefficients ranging from 0.457 to 0.783. A total of 84 QTLs associated with soybean lodging and related traits were identified using the GB population. The contribution of phenotypic variance ranged from 1.26 to 66.87%, with LOD scores ranging from 2.52 to 69.22. Additionally, within these QTLs, a stable major QTL associated with lodging was newly discovered in the GB population. Out of the ten major QTLs associated with other related traits, nine of them were situated within the qLD-4-1 interval of the major lodging score locus, displaying phenotypic variations ranging from 12.10 to 66.87%. Specific alterations in gene expression were revealed through the analysis of resequencing data from the two parental lines, potentially indicating their significant roles in lodging. Subsequently, it was determined through qRT-PCR that four genes are likely to be the major genes controlling soybean lodging. Conclusions This study's findings offer valuable insights into the genetic underpinnings of soybean lodging resistance traits. By comprehending the potential genetic factors associated with lodging, this research lays the groundwork for breeding high-yield soybeans with improved lodging resistance.
MYB transcription factors play an extremely important regulatory role in plant responses to stress and anthocyanin synthesis. Cloning of potato StMYB-related genes can provide a theoretical basis for the genetic improvement of pigmented potatoes. In this study, two MYB transcription factors, StMYB113 and StMYB308, possibly related to anthocyanin synthesis, were screened under low-temperature conditions based on the low-temperature-responsive potato StMYB genes family analysis obtained by transcriptome sequencing. By analyzed the protein properties and promoters of StMYB113 and StMYB308 and their relative expression levels at different low-temperature treatment periods, it is speculated that StMYB113 and StMYB308 can be expressed in response to low temperature and can promote anthocyanin synthesis. The overexpression vectors of StMYB113 and StMYB308 were constructed for transient transformation tobacco. Color changes were observed, and the expression levels of the structural genes of tobacco anthocyanin synthesis were determined. The results showed that StMYB113 lacking the complete MYB domain could not promote the accumulation of tobacco anthocyanins, while StMYB308 could significantly promote the accumulation involved in tobacco anthocyanins. This study provides a theoretical reference for further study of the mechanism of StMYB113 and StMYB308 transcription factors in potato anthocyanin synthesis.
To reduce the use of antibiotics and chemicals in aquaculture, an edible herb, Bidens pilosa, has been selected as a multifunctional feed additive. Although there has been considerable research into the effects of B. pilosa on poultry, the wider effects of B. pilosa, particularly on the growth and gut microbiota of fish, remain largely unexplored. We aimed to investigate the interactive effects between the host on growth and the gut microbiota using transcriptomics and the gut microbiota in B. pilosa-fed tilapia. In this study, we added 0.5% and 1% B. pilosa to the diet and observed that the growth performance of tilapia significantly increased over 8 weeks of feeding. Comparative transcriptome analysis was performed on RNA sequence profiles obtained from liver and muscle tissues. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that B. pilosa regulates several pathways and genes involved in amino acid metabolism, lipid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, endocrine system, signal transduction, and metabolism of other amino acids. The expression of the selected growth-associated genes was validated by qRT-PCR. The qRT-PCR results indicated that B. pilosa may enhance growth performance by activating the expression of the liver igf1 and muscle igf1rb genes and inhibiting the expression of the muscle negative regulator mstnb. Both the enhancement of liver endocrine IGF1/IGF1Rb signaling and the suppression of muscle autocrine/paracrine MSTN signaling induced the expression of myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs), myod1, myog and mrf4 in muscle to promote muscle growth in tilapia. The predicted function of the gut microbiota showed several significantly different pathways that overlapped with the KEGG enrichment results of differentially expressed genes in the liver transcriptomes. This finding suggested that the gut microbiota may influence liver metabolism through the gut-liver axis in B. pilosa-fed tilapia. In conclusion, dietary B. pilosa can regulate endocrine IGF1 signaling and autocrine/paracrine MSTN signaling to activate the expression of MRFs to promote muscle growth and alter the composition of gut bacteria, which can then affect liver amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, endocrine system, lipid metabolism, metabolism of other amino acids, and signal transduction in the host, ultimately enhancing growth performance. Our results suggest that B. pilosa has the potential to be a functional additive that can be used as an alternative to reduce antibiotic use as a growth promoter in aquaculture.
BackgroundTCP proteins are plant specific transcription factors that play important roles in plant growth and development. Despite the known significance of these transcription factors in general plant development, their specific role in fruit growth remains largely uncharted. Therefore, this study explores the potential role of TCP transcription factors in the growth and development of sweet cherry fruits.ResultsThirteen members of the PavTCP family were identified within the sweet cherry plant, with two, PavTCP1 and PavTCP4, found to contain potential target sites for Pav-miR159, Pav-miR139a, and Pav-miR139b-3p. Analyses of cis-acting elements and Arabidopsis homology prediction analyses that the PavTCP family comprises many light-responsive elements. Homologs of PavTCP1 and PavTCP3 in Arabidopsis TCP proteins were found to be crucial to light responses. Shading experiments showed distinct correlation patterns between PavTCP1, 2, and 3 and total anthocyanins, soluble sugars, and soluble solids in sweet cherry fruits. These observations suggest that these genes may contribute significantly to sweet cherry light responses. In particular, PavTCP1 could play a key role, potentially mediated through Pav-miR159, Pav-miR139a, and Pav-miR139b-3p.ConclusionThis study is the first to unveil the potential function of TCP transcription factors in the light responses of sweet cherry fruits, paving the way for future investigations into the role of this transcription factor family in plant fruit development.
BackgroundMelanin in the black-bone chicken's body is considered the material basis for its medicinal effects and is an economically important trait. Therefore, improving the melanin content is a crucial focus in the breeding process of black-bone chickens. Luning chickens are black-bone chickens, with black beaks, skin, and meat. To investigate the genetic diversity and molecular mechanisms of melanin deposition in Luning chickens, we conducted whole-genome resequencing to analyze their breeding history and identify candidate genes influencing their black phenotype, along with transcriptome sequencing of dorsal skin tissues of male Luning chickens.ResultsPopulation structure analysis revealed that Luning chickens tend to cluster independently and are closely related to Tibetan chickens. Runs of homozygosity analysis suggested potential inbreeding in the Luning chicken and Tibetan chicken population. By combining genetic differentiation index (Fst) and nucleotide diversity (theta pi) ratios, we pinpointed selected regions associated with melanin deposition. Gene annotation identified 540 genes with the highest Fst value in LOC101750371 and LOC121108313, located on the 68.24-68.58 Mb interval of chromosome Z. Combining genomic and transcriptomic data, we identified ATP5E, EDN3, and LOC101750371 as candidate genes influencing skin color traits in black-bone chickens.ConclusionsThis study characterized the evolutionary history of Luning chickens and preliminarily excavated candidate genes influencing the genetic mechanism of pigmentation in black-bone chickens, providing valuable insights for the study of animal melanin deposition.
Background Schizochytrium limacinum holds significant value utilized in the industrial-scale synthesis of natural DHA. Nitrogen-limited treatment can effectively increase the content of fatty acids and DHA, but there is currently no research on chromatin accessibility during the process of transcript regulation. The objective of this research was to delve into the workings of fatty acid production in S. limacinum by examining the accessibility of promoters and profiling gene expressions. Results Results showed that differentially accessible chromatin regions (DARs)-associated genes were enriched in fatty acid metabolism, signal transduction mechanisms, and energy production. By identifying and annotating DARs-associated motifs, the study obtained 54 target transcription factor classes, including BPC, RAMOSA1, SPI1, MYC, and MYB families. Transcriptomics results revealed that several differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including SlFAD2, SlALDH, SlCAS1, SlNSDHL, and SlDGKI, are directly related to the biosynthesis of fatty acids, meanwhile, SlRPS6KA, SlCAMK1, SlMYB3R1, and SlMYB3R5 serve as transcription factors that could potentially influence the regulation of fatty acid production. In the integration analysis of DARs and ATAC-seq, 13 genes were identified, which were shared by both DEGs and DARs-associated genes, including SlCAKM, SlRP2, SlSHOC2, SlTN, SlSGK2, SlHMP, SlOGT, SlclpB, and SlDNAAF3. Conclusions SlCAKM may act as a negative regulator of fatty acid and DHA synthesis, while SlSGK2 may act as a positive regulator, which requires further study in the future. These insights enhance our comprehension of the processes underlying fatty acid and DHA production in S. limacinum. They also supply a foundational theoretical framework and practical assistance for the development of strains rich in fatty acids and DHA.
BackgroundCyclocarya paliurus is a high-value tree, and it contains a variety of bioactive secondary metabolites which have broad application prospects in medicine, food and health care. Triterpenoids can improve the bioactive function of C. paliurus health tea and also improve the efficacy of health care tea.ResultsThe results of this study showed that there were 69 kinds were terpenoids, and triterpenoids accounted for more than 80%. We excavated 5 kinds of triterpenoid metabolites with high content and significant difference dynamics, namely, corosolic acid, asiatic acid, maslinic acid, ursolic acid and oleanolic acid. The co-expression analysis identified CYP71D8 and CYP716A15 co-expressed with beta-AS may generate oleanane type triterpenoids by modifying beta-amyrin, while CYP71AN24 and CYP98A2 co-expressed with LUS may play a key role in lupine type triterpenoids biosynthesis. MYB,Whirly,WRKY and bHLH families, which showed strong correlation with function genes, may play an important role in the regulation of P450 and OSC expression. A total of 20 modules were identified by WGCNA analysis, and CYP71AU50 and CYP716A15 in tan and orange modules may play a major role in the synthesis of oleanolic acid, ursolic acid and asiatic acid, while CYP82D47 in lightcyan 1 module may be the hub gene for the biosynthesis of corosolic acid and maslinic acid.ConclusionsOur findings mined candidate genes closely related to triterpenoid synthesis in C. paliurus. The results of this paper can provide scientific reference for breeding high-content triterpenoid varieties of C. paliurus.
Objectives Homopolymer (HP) sequencing is error-prone in next-generation sequencing (NGS) assays, and may induce false insertion/deletions and substitutions. This study aimed to evaluate the performance of dichromatic and tetrachromatic fluorogenic NGS platforms when sequencing homopolymeric regions. Results A HP-containing plasmid was constructed and diluted to serial frequencies (3%, 10%, 30%, 60%) to determine the performance of an MGISEQ-2000, MGISEQ-200, and NextSeq 2000 in HP sequencing. An evident negative correlation was observed between the detected frequencies of four nucleotide HPs and the HP length. Significantly decreased rates (P < 0.01) were found in all 8-mer HPs in all three NGS systems at all four expected frequencies, except in the NextSeq 2000 at 3%. With the application of a unique molecular identifier (UMI) pipeline, there were no differences between the detected frequencies of any HPs and the expected frequencies, except for poly-G 8-mers using the MGI 200 platform. UMIs improved the performance of all three NGS platforms in HP sequencing. Conclusions We first constructed an HP-containing plasmid based on an EGFR gene backbone to evaluate the performance of NGS platforms when sequencing homopolymeric regions. A highly comparable performance was observed between the MGISEQ-2000 and NextSeq 2000, and introducing UMIs is a promising approach to improve the performance of NGS platforms in sequencing homopolymeric regions.
BackgroundHybridization capture-based targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) is gaining importance in routine cancer clinical practice. DNA library preparation is a fundamental step to produce high-quality sequencing data. Numerous unexpected, low variant allele frequency calls were observed in libraries using sonication fragmentation and enzymatic fragmentation. In this study, we investigated the characteristics of the artifact reads induced by sonication and enzymatic fragmentation. We also developed a bioinformatic algorithm to filter these sequencing errors.ResultsWe used pairwise comparisons of somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and insertions and deletions (indels) of the same tumor DNA samples prepared using both ultrasonic and enzymatic fragmentation protocols. Our analysis revealed that the number of artifact variants was significantly greater in the samples generated using enzymatic fragmentation than using sonication. Most of the artifacts derived from the sonication-treated libraries were chimeric artifact reads containing both cis- and trans-inverted repeat sequences of the genomic DNA. In contrast, chimeric artifact reads of endonuclease-treated libraries contained palindromic sequences with mismatched bases. Based on these distinctive features, we proposed a mechanistic hypothesis model, PDSM (pairing of partial single strands derived from a similar molecule), by which these sequencing errors derive from ultrasonication and enzymatic fragmentation library preparation. We developed a bioinformatic algorithm to generate a custom mutation "blacklist" in the BED region to reduce errors in downstream analyses.ConclusionsWe first proposed a mechanistic hypothesis model (PDSM) of sequencing errors caused by specific structures of inverted repeat sequences and palindromic sequences in the natural genome. This new hypothesis predicts the existence of chimeric reads that could not be explained by previous models, and provides a new direction for further improving NGS analysis accuracy. A bioinformatic algorithm, ArtifactsFinder, was developed and used to reduce the sequencing errors in libraries produced using sonication and enzymatic fragmentation.
Background Acinetobacter baumannii (A. baumannii) is a common opportunistic pathogen in hospitals that causes nosocomial infection. In order to understand the phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of A. baumannii isolates, we sequenced and analyzed 62 A. baumannii isolates from a hospital in Gansu province. Results Non-repeated 62 A. baumannii isolates were collected from August 2015 to November 2021. Most isolates (56/62) were resistant to multiple drugs. All the 62 A. baumannii isolates were resistant to aztreonam and contained blaADC-25 gene which exists only on chromosome contigs. The 62 isolates in this study were not clustered in a single clade, but were dispersed among multiple clades in the common genome. Seven sequence types were identified by Multilocus sequence type (MLST) analysis and most isolates (52/62) belonged to ST2. The plasmids were grouped into 11 clusters by MOB-suite. Conclusions This study furthers the understanding of A. baumannii antimicrobial-resistant genotypes, and may aid in prevention and control nosocomial infection caused by drug-resistant A. baumannii.
Background The fruit ripening period is an important target trait in fruit tree crop breeding programs. Thus, citrus tree breeders seek to develop extreme early ripening cultivars that allow optimization of citrus maturation periods. In this study, we explored the regulatory network involved in fruit ripening in Citrus sinensis using the 'Newhall' navel orange variety and its early-ripening mutant, 'Gannanzao'. This research will provide a basis for further research on important signaling pathways, gene functions and variety breeding of Citrus sinensis related to fruit ripening period. Results Physiological analyses suggested that early fruit ripening in 'Gannanzao' is regulated by early accumulation of abscisic acid (ABA), persistently high levels of jasmonic acid (JA), and higher sucrose content in the pericarp. Pericarp samples from 'Gannanzao' and 'Newhall' navel oranges were sampled for RNA sequencing analysis at 180, 200, and 220 days after flowering; 1430 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that these DEGs were mainly enriched in the plant hormone signal transduction and sugar metabolism pathways, as well as other pathways related to fruit ripening. Important DEGs associated with fruit ripening in 'Gannanzao' included genes involved in ABA and JA metabolism and signal transduction, as well as sugar metabolism. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis showed that the deep pink module had the strongest correlations with ABA content, JA content, and early ripening. Based on gene functionality and gene expression analyses of 37 genes in this module, two candidate hub genes and two ethylene response factor 13 (ERF13) genes (Cs_ont_5g000690 and Cs_ont_5g000700) were identified as key genes regulated by ABA and JA signaling. These findings will help to clarify the mechanisms that underlie early citrus fruit ripening and will lead to the development of excellent genetic resources for further breeding of extreme early-ripening varieties. Conclusions Through analyses of the 'Newhall' navel orange cultivar and its early-ripening mutant 'Gannanzao', we identified genes involved in ABA and JA metabolism, signal transduction, and sugar metabolism that were related to fruit ripening. Among these, two ERF13 genes were inferred to be key genes in the regulation of fruit ripening. These findings provide insights into the genetic architecture related to early fruit ripening in C. sinensis.
BackgroundSevere influenza is a serious global health issue that leads to prolonged hospitalization and mortality on a significant scale. The pathogenesis of this infectious disease is poorly understood. Therefore, this study aimed to identify the key genes associated with severe influenza patients necessitating invasive mechanical ventilation.MethodsThe current study utilized two publicly accessible gene expression profiles (GSE111368 and GSE21802) from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. The research focused on identifying the genes exhibiting differential expression between severe and non-severe influenza patients. We employed three machine learning algorithms, namely the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator regression model, Random Forest, and Support Vector Machine-Recursive Feature Elimination, to detect potential key genes. The key gene was further selected based on the diagnostic performance of the target genes substantiated in the dataset GSE101702. A single-sample gene set enrichment analysis algorithm was applied to evaluate the participation of immune cell infiltration and their associations with key genes.ResultsA total of 44 differentially expressed genes were recognized; among them, we focused on 10 common genes, namely PCOLCE2, HLA_DPA1, LOC653061, TDRD9, MPO, HLA_DQA1, MAOA, S100P, RAP1GAP, and CA1. To ensure the robustness of our findings, we employed overlapping LASSO regression, Random Forest, and SVM-RFE algorithms. By utilizing these algorithms, we were able to pinpoint the aforementioned 10 genes as potential biomarkers for distinguishing between both cases of influenza (severe and non-severe). However, the gene HLA_DPA1 has been recognized as a crucial factor in the pathological condition of severe influenza. Notably, the validation dataset revealed that this gene exhibited the highest area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, with a value of 0.891. The use of single-sample gene set enrichment analysis has provided valuable insights into the immune responses of patients afflicted with severe influenza that have further revealed a categorical correlation between the expression of HLA_DPA1 and lymphocytes.ConclusionThe findings indicated that the HLA_DPA1 gene may play a crucial role in the immune-pathological condition of severe influenza and could serve as a promising therapeutic target for patients infected with severe influenza.
Background Primulina hunanensis, a troglobitic plant within the Primulina genus of Gesneriaceae family, exhibits robust resilience to arid conditions and holds great horticultural potential as an ornamental plant. The work of chloroplast genome (cpDNA) has been recently accomplished, however, the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) that is crucial for plant evolution has not been reported. Results In this study, we sequenced and assembled the P. hunanensis complete mtDNA, and elucidated its evolutionary and phylogenetic relationships. The assembled mtDNA spans 575,242 bp with 43.54% GC content, encompassing 60 genes, including 37 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 20 tRNA genes, and 3 rRNA genes. Notably, high number of repetitive sequences in the mtDNA and substantial sequence translocation from chloroplasts to mitochondria were observed. To determine the evolutionary and taxonomic positioning of P. hunanensis, a phylogenetic tree was constructed using mitochondrial PCGs from P. hunanensis and 32 other taxa. Furthermore, an exploration of PCGs relative synonymous codon usage, identification of RNA editing events, and an investigation of collinearity with closely related species were conducted. Conclusions This study reports the initial assembly and annotation of P. hunanensis mtDNA, contributing to the limited mtDNA repository for Gesneriaceae plants and advancing our understanding of their evolution for improved utilization and conservation.
BackgroundThe tea plant Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze is a perennial crop, invaded by diversity of insect pest species, and pink tea mite is one of the most devastating pests for sustainable tea production. However, molecular mechanism of defense responses against pink tea mites in tea is still unknown. In this study, metabolomics and transcriptome profiles of susceptible and resistant tea varieties were compared before and after pink tea mite infestation.ResultsMetabolomics analysis revealed that abundance levels of polyphenol-related compounds changed significantly before and after infestation. At the transcript level, nearly 8 GB of clean reads were obtained from each sequenced library, and a comparison of infested plants of resistant and susceptible tea varieties revealed 9402 genes with significant differential expression. An array of genes enriched in plant pathogen interaction and biosynthetic pathways of phenylpropanoids showed significant differential regulation in response to pink tea mite invasion. In particular, the functional network linkage of disease resistant proteins, phenylalanine ammonia lyase, flavanone -3-hydroxylase, hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA shikimate transferase, brassinosteroid-6-oxidase 1, and gibberellin 2 beta-dioxygenase induced dynamic defense signals to suppress prolonged pink tea mite attacks. Further integrated analyses identified a complex network of transcripts and metabolites interlinked with precursors of various flavonoids that are likely modulate resistance against to pink tea mite.ConclusionsOur results characterized the profiles of insect induced metabolic and transcript reprogramming and identified a defense regulatory network that can potentially be used to fend off pink tea mites damage.
Background The Flavonoid 3'-hydroxylase gene(F3'H) is an important structural gene in the anthocyanin synthesis pathway of plants, which has been proven to be involved in the color formation of organs such as leaves, flowers, and fruits in many plants. However, the mechanism and function in barley are still unclear. Results In order to explore the molecular mechanism of the grain color formation of purple qingke, we used the cultivated qingke variety Nierumzha (purple grain) and the selected qingke variety Kunlun 10 (white grain) to conduct transcriptomic sequencing at the early milk, late milk and soft dough stage. Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) was used to construct weighted gene co-expression network related to grain color formation, and three key modules (brown, yellow, and turquoise modules) related to purple grain of qingke were selected. F3'H (HORVU1Hr1G094880) was selected from the hub gene of the module for the yeast library, yeast two-hybrid (Y2H), subcellular localization and other studies. It was found that in purple qingke, HvnF3'H mainly distributed in the cytoplasm and cell membrane and interacted with several stress proteins such as methyltransferase protein and zinc finger protein. Conclusions The results of this study provide reference for the regulation mechanism of anthocyanin-related genes in purple grain qingke.
BackgroundNeddylation, an important post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins, plays a crucial role in follicular development. MLN4924 is a small-molecule inhibitor of the neddylation-activating enzyme (NAE) that regulates various biological processes. However, the regulatory mechanisms of neddylation in rabbit ovarian cells have not been emphasized. Here, the transcriptome and metabolome profiles in granulosa cells (GCs) treated with MLN4924 were utilized to identify differentially expressed genes, followed by pathway analysis to precisely define the altered metabolisms.ResultsThe results showed that 563 upregulated and 910 downregulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were mainly enriched in pathways related to cancer, cell cycle, PI3K-AKT, progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation, and PPAR signaling pathway. Furthermore, we characterized that MLN4924 inhibits PPAR-mediated lipid metabolism, and disrupts the cell cycle by promoting the apoptosis and proliferation of GCs. Importantly, we found the reduction of several metabolites in the MLN4924 treated GCs, including glycerophosphocholine, arachidic acid, and palmitic acid, which was consistent with the deregulation of PPAR signaling pathways. Furthermore, the increased metabolites included 6-Deoxy-6-sulfo-D-glucono-1,5-lactone and N-Acetyl-D-glucosaminyldiphosphodolichol. Combined with transcriptome data analyses, we identified genes that strongly correlate with metabolic dysregulation, particularly those related to glucose and lipid metabolism. Therefore, neddylation inhibition may disrupt the energy metabolism of GCs.ConclusionsThese results provide a foundation for in-depth research into the role and molecular mechanism of neddylation in ovary development.
Cold stress poses a significant threat to the quality and productivity of lychee (Litchi chinensis Sonn.). While previous research has extensively explored the genomic and transcriptomic responses to cold stress in lychee, the translatome has not been thoroughly investigated. This study delves into the translatomic landscape of the 'Xiangjinfeng' cultivar under both control and low-temperature conditions using RNA sequencing and ribosome profiling. We uncovered a significant divergence between the transcriptomic and translatomic responses to cold exposure. Additionally, bioinformatics analyses underscored the crucial role of codon occupancy in lychee's cold tolerance mechanisms. Our findings reveal that the modulation of translation via codon occupancy is a vital strategy to abiotic stress. Specifically, the study identifies ribosome stalling, particularly at the E site AAU codon, as a key element of the translation machinery in lychee's response to cold stress. This work enhances our understanding of the molecular dynamics of lychee's reaction to cold stress and emphasizes the essential role of translational regulation in the plant's environmental adaptability.
Dynamic metabolic reprogramming occurs at different stages of myogenesis and contributes to the fate determination of skeletal muscle satellite cells (MuSCs). Accumulating evidence suggests that mutations in myostatin (MSTN) have a vital role in regulating muscle energy metabolism. Here, we explored the metabolic reprogramming in MuSCs and myotube cells in MSTN and FGF5 dual-gene edited sheep models prepared previously, and also focused on the metabolic alterations during myogenic differentiation of MuSCs. Our study revealed that the pathways of nucleotide metabolism, pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis were weakened, while the unsaturated fatty acids biosynthesis were strengthened during myogenic differentiation of sheep MuSCs. The MSTN and FGF5 dual-gene editing mainly inhibited nucleotide metabolism and biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids in sheep MuSCs, reduced the number of lipid droplets in per satellite cell, and promoted the pentose phosphate pathway, and the interconversion of pentose and glucuronate. The MSTN and FGF5 dual-gene editing also resulted in the inhibition of nucleotide metabolism and TCA cycle pathway in differentiated myotube cells. The differential metabolites we identified can be characterized as biomarkers of different cellular states, and providing a new reference for MSTN and FGF5 dual-gene editing in regulation of muscle development. It may also provide a reference for the development of muscle regeneration drugs targeting biomarkers.
Background Whole plant senescence represents the final stage in the life cycle of annual plants, characterized by the decomposition of aging organs and transfer of nutrients to seeds, thereby ensuring the survival of next generation. However, the transcriptomic profile of vegetative organs during this death process remains to be fully elucidated, especially regarding the distinctions between natural programmed death and artificial sudden death induced by herbicide. Results Differential genes expression analysis using RNA-seq in leaves and roots of Arabidopsis thaliana revealed that natural senescence commenced in leaves at 45-52 days after planting, followed by roots initiated at 52-60 days. Additionally, both organs exhibited similarities with artificially induced senescence by glyphosate. Transcription factors Rap2.6L and WKRY75 appeared to serve as central mediators of regulatory changes during natural senescence, as indicated by co-expression networks. Furthermore, the upregulation of RRTF1, exclusively observed during natural death, suggested its role as a regulator of jasmonic acid and reactive oxygen species (ROS) responses, potentially triggering nitrogen recycling in leaves, such as the glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) shunt. Root senescence was characterized by the activation of AMT2;1 and GLN1;3, facilitating ammonium availability for root-to-shoot translocation, likely under the regulation of PDF2.1. Conclusions Our study offers valuable insights into the transcriptomic interplay between phytohormones and ROS during whole plant senescence. We observed distinct regulatory networks governing nitrogen utilization in leaf and root senescence processes. Furthermore, the efficient allocation of energy from vegetative organs to seeds emerges as a critical determinant of population sustainability of annual Arabidopsis.
BackgroundKinesin is a motor for microtubule-based motility. It plays a vital role in plant growth and development. The kinesin superfamily members are known mainly from Arabidopsis. Little research about kinesin superfamily has been conducted on hexploid wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). The functions of kinesins in wheat growth and development, regulation of cell division and response to stress are still unclear.ResultsIn this study, we identified 155 kinesin (TaKIN) genes in wheat, which were divided into 10 families and some orphan genes via phylogenetic analysis. Less gene structural differences showed that TaKIN genes had redundant functions. The conserved domains of different family members were different, and some families might have some special functional domains. We found many cis-acting elements related to hormones (GA, Auxin, SA, MeJA), cell cycle and cell division in homeopathic elements of the TaKIN genes. Collinearity analysis showed that TaKIN genes were more conservative in monocotyledons. Expression level in different tissues at different stages suggested that TaKIN family may function during the whole growth and development process in wheat. It was worth noting there were quite different at gene expression level between physiological and heritable male sterile lines during the different stages of pollen development. The differential expression patterns of some TaKIN genes between male sterile line and maintainer line might be related to wheat male sterility. Furthermore, we also found TaKIN genes were involved in response to plant hormones and abiotic stress by stress assays.ConclusionsThe result is useful for further exploration of the molecular mechanism of kinesin genes in wheat male sterility and provides important information concerning response to plant hormones and abiotic stress caused by kinesin genes.
BackgroundStaphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) mastitis results in economic losses during dairy production. Understanding the biological progression of bovine S. aureus mastitis is vital for its prevention. Lipoteichoic acid is a key virulence factor of S. aureus (aLTA), but the main biological pathways involved in its effect on bovine mammary epithetionallial cells (Mac-T) apoptosis and necrosis have not been fully explored. Folic acid (FA) has anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic effects. However, the role of FA in mediating the effects of aLTA on apoptosis and necrosis remains unknown.ResultsWe found that low concentration of aLTA inhibited apoptosis and necrosis and that high concentration promoted the apoptosis and necrosis of Mac-T. FA pretreatment alleviated high concentration of aLTA induced apoptosis. Through transcriptomic analysis, we found that nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A (NR4A), which alters the expression of downstream genes involved in apoptosis, proliferation, and inflammation, decreased under stimulation with a low concentration of aLTA and increased under stimulation with a high concentration of aLTA. Under stimulation with a high concentration of aLTA, the expression of the NR4A subfamily could be inhibited by FA. The results showed that aLTA may affect apoptosis and necrosis through the NR4A subfamily by targeting genes involved in bacterial invasion of epithelial cells, the IL-17 signaling pathway, DNA replication, longevity regulation, the cell cycle, and tight junction pathways. We further found that the expression trends of NR4A1 and the target genes of the NR4A subfamily (PTGS2, ESPL1, MCM5, and BUB1B) in the blood of healthy cows (Healthy), subclinical mastitis cows (SCM), and SCM supplemented with FA (SCM_FA) were consistent with those observed at the cellular level in this study.ConclusionsOur study revealed that low and high concentrations of aLTA have opposite effects on apoptosis and necrosis of Mac-T and that FA can alleviate the apoptosis induced by high concentration of aLTA. Transcriptome analysis revealed that the NR4A subfamily play a role in the ability of FA to alleviate the apoptosis and necrosis induced by high concentration of aLTA.
Background Insects rely on sophisticated sensitive chemosensory systems to sense their complex chemical environment. This sensory process involves a combination of odorant receptors (ORs), gustatory receptors (GRs) and ionotropic receptors (IRs) in the chemosensory system. This study focused on the identification and characterization of these three types of chemosensory receptor genes in two closely related Phthorimaea pest species, Phthorimaea operculella (potato tuber moth) and Phthorimaea absoluta (tomato leaf miner). Results Based on manual annotation of the genome, we identified a total of 349 chemoreceptor genes from the genome of P. operculella, including 93 OR, 206 GR and 50 IR genes, while for P. absoluta, we identified 72 OR, 122 GR and 46 IR genes. Through phylogenetic analysis, we observed minimal differences in the number and types of ORs and IRs between the potato tuber moth and tomato leaf miner. In addition, we found that compared with those of tomato leaf miners, the gustatory receptor branch of P. operculella has undergone a large expansion, which may be related to P. absoluta having a narrower host range than P. operculella. Through analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of male and female antennae, we uncovered 45 DEGs (including 32ORs, 9 GRs, and 4 IRs). Conclusions Our research provides a foundation for exploring the chemical ecology of these two pests and offers new insights into the dietary differentiation of lepidopteran insects, while simultaneously providing molecular targets for developing environmentally friendly pest control methods based on insect chemoreception.
BackgroundAcute cardiac injury caused by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) increases mortality. Acute cardiac injury caused by COVID-19 requires understanding how severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) directly infects cardiomyocytes. This study provides a solid foundation for related studies by using a model of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) at the transcriptome level, highlighting the relevance of this study to related studies. SARS-CoV-2 infection in hiPSC-CMs has previously been studied by bioinformatics without presenting the full molecular biological process. We present a unique bioinformatics view of the complete molecular biological process of SARS-CoV-2 infection in hiPSC-CMs.MethodsTo validate the RNA-seq datasets, we used GSE184715 and GSE150392 for the analytical studies, GSE193722 for validation at the cellular level, and GSE169241 for validation in heart tissue samples. GeneCards and MsigDB databases were used to find genes associated with the phenotype. In addition to differential expression analysis and principal component analysis (PCA), we also performed protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis, functional enrichment analysis, hub gene analysis, upstream transcription factor prediction, and drug prediction.ResultsDifferentially expressed genes (DEGs) were classified into four categories: cardiomyocyte cytoskeletal protein inhibition, proto-oncogene activation and inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and intracellular cytoplasmic physiological function. Each of the hub genes showed good diagnostic prediction, which was well validated in other datasets. Inhibited biological functions included cardiomyocyte cytoskeletal proteins, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis and electron transport chain (ETC), glucose metabolism, amino acid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, pyruvate metabolism, citric acid cycle, nucleic acid metabolism, replication, transcription, translation, ubiquitination, autophagy, and cellular transport. Proto-oncogenes, inflammation, nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappa B) pathways, and interferon signaling were activated, as well as inflammatory factors. Viral infection activates multiple pathways, including the interferon pathway, proto-oncogenes and mitochondrial oxidative stress, while inhibiting cardiomyocyte backbone proteins and energy metabolism. Infection limits intracellular synthesis and metabolism, as well as the raw materials for mitochondrial energy synthesis. Mitochondrial dysfunction and energy abnormalities are ultimately caused by proto-oncogene activation and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Activation of the interferon pathway, proto-oncogene up-regulation, and mitochondrial oxidative stress cause the inflammatory response and lead to diminished cardiomyocyte contraction. Replication, transcription, translation, ubiquitination, autophagy, and cellular transport are among the functions that decline physiologically.ConclusionSARS-CoV-2 infection in hiPSC-CMs is fundamentally mediated via mitochondrial dysfunction. Therapeutic interventions targeting mitochondrial dysfunction may alleviate the cardiovascular complications associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
BackgroundRecombination signal-binding protein for immunoglobulin kappa J region (RBPJ) is a transcriptional regulator that plays an important role in maintaining immune homeostasis. This study aimed to estimate the expression of RBPJ in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients and investigate its relationship with RA.MethodsA total of 83 newly diagnosed RA patients and 70 healthy controls were included. mRNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and the expression of RBPJ was detected using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). An RA dataset (GSE89408) was obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, and RA synovial tissues were divided into two groups. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were selected with the "DESeq2" R package.ResultsRBPJ expression was lower in RA patients than in health controls and was negatively correlated with the DAS28 score, C-reactive protein (CRP) level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). RA synovial tissues from GSE89408 were classified into RBPJ-low (<= 25%) and RBPJ-high (>= 75%) groups according to RBPJ expression, and 562 DEGs were identified. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analyses revealed that the DEGs significantly affected the regulation of T cell activation and lymphocyte/mononuclear cell differentiation. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis revealed that the most enriched pathways of DEGs were the T cell receptor signaling pathway, Th1/2 and Th17 cell differentiation, the PI3K - Akt signaling pathway and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction. CytoHubba Plugin revealed that most of the top 10 genes were involved in osteoclast differentiation, the T cell receptor signaling pathway and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction.ConclusionsRBPJ expression was significantly lower in RA patients and negatively correlated with disease activity. GEO dataset analysis demonstrated that RBPJ may be involved in osteoclast differentiation, T cell activation and differentiation, and the T cell receptor signaling pathway. Our research may contribute to understanding the potential mechanisms by which RBPJ regulates T cell differentiation and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction in RA patients.
Background Yaks are a vital livestock in the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau area for providing food products, maintaining sustainable ecosystems, and promoting cultural heritage. Because of uncontrolled mating, it is impossible to estimate inbreeding level of yak populations using the pedigree-based approaches. With the aims to accurately evaluate inbreeding level of two Chinese yak populations (Maiwa and Jiulong), we obtained genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by DNA sequencing and calculated five SNP-by-SNP estimators (F-HOM, F-L&H, F-VR1, F-VR2, and F-YAN), as well as two segment-based estimators of runs of homozygosity (ROH, F-ROH) and homozygous-by-descent (HBD, F-HBD). Functional implications were analyzed for the positional candidate genes located within the related genomic regions.Results A total of 151,675 and 190,955 high-quality SNPs were obtained from 71 Maiwa and 30 Jiulong yaks, respectively. Jiulong had greater genetic diversity than Maiwa in terms of allele frequency and nucleotide diversity. The two populations could be genetically distinguished by principal component analysis, with the mean differentiation index (Fst) of 0.0054. The greater genomic inbreeding levels of Maiwa yaks were consistently supported by all five SNP-by-SNP estimators. Based on simple proportion of homozygous SNPs (F-HOM), a lower inbreeding level was indicated by three successfully sequenced old leather samples that may represent historical Maiwa yaks about five generations ago. There were 3304 ROH detected among all samples, with mean and median length of 1.97 Mb and 1.0 Mb, respectively. A total of 94 HBD segments were found among all samples, whereas 92 of them belonged to the shortest class with the mean length of 10.9 Kb. Based on the estimates of F-ROH and F-HBD, however, there was no difference in inbreeding level between Maiwa and Jiulong yaks. Within the genomic regions with the significant Fst or enriched by ROH, we found several candidate genes and pathways that have been reported to be related to diverse production traits in farm animals.Conclusions We successfully evaluated the genomic inbreeding level of two Chinese yak populations. Although different estimators resulted in inconsistent conclusions on their genomic inbreeding levels, our results may be helpful to implement the genetic conservation and utilization programs for the two yak populations
Background Endonucleases play a crucial role in plant growth and stress response by breaking down nuclear DNA. However, the specific members and biological functions of the endonuclease encoding genes in wheat remain to be determined. Results In this study, we identified a total of 26 TaENDO family genes at the wheat genome-wide level. These genes were located on chromosomes 2 A, 2B, 2D, 3 A, 3B, and 3D and classified into four groups, each sharing similar gene structures and conserved motifs. Furthermore, we identified diverse stress-response and growth-related cis-elements in the promoter of TaENDO genes, which were broadly expressed in different organs, and several TaENDO genes were significantly induced under drought and salt stresses. We further examined the biological function of TaENDO23 gene since it was rapidly induced under drought stress and exhibited high expression in spikes and grains. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that TaENDO23 was localized in the cytoplasm of wheat protoplasts. qRT-PCR results indicated that the expression of TaENDO23 increased under PEG6000 and abscisic acid treatments, but decreased under NaCl treatment. TaENDO23 mainly expressed in leaves and spikes. A kompetitive allele-specific PCR (KASP) marker was developed to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms in TaENDO23 gene in 256 wheat accessions. The alleles with TaENDO23-HapI haplotypes had higher grain weight and size compared to TaENDO23-HapII. The geographical and annual frequency distributions of the two TaENDO23 haplotypes revealed that the elite haplotype TaENDO23-HapI was positively selected in the wheat breeding process. Conclusion We systematically analyzed the evolutionary relationships, gene structure characteristics, and expression patterns of TaENDO genes in wheat. The expression of TaENDO23, in particular, was induced under drought stress, mainly expressed in the leaves and grains. The KASP marker of TaENDO23 gene successfully distinguished between the wheat accessions, revealing TaENDO23-HapI as the elite haplotype associated with improved grain weight and size. These findings provide insights into the evolution and characteristics of TaENDO genes at the genome-wide level in wheat, laying the foundation for further biological analysis of TaENDO23 gene, especially in response to drought stress and grain development.
Background Haemonchus contortus (H. contortus) is the most common parasitic nematode in ruminants and is prevalent worldwide. H. contortus resistance to albendazole (ABZ) hinders the efficacy of anthelmintic drugs, but little is known about the molecular mechanisms that regulate this of drug resistance. Recent research has demonstrated that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) can exert significant influence as pivotal regulators of the emergence of drug resistance. Results In this study, transcriptome sequencing was conducted on both albendazole-sensitive (ABZ-sensitive) and albendazole-resistant (ABZ-resistant) H. contortus strains, with three biological replicates for each group. The analysis of lncRNA in the transcriptomic data revealed that there were 276 differentially expressed lncRNA (DElncRNA) between strains with ABZ-sensitive and ABZ-resistant according to the criteria of |log2Foldchange|>= 1 and FDR < 0.05. Notably, MSTRG.12969.2 and MSTRG.9827.1 exhibited the most significant upregulation and downregulation, respectively, in the resistant strains. The potential roles of the DElncRNAs included catalytic activity, stimulus response, regulation of drug metabolism, and modulation of the immune response. Moreover, we investigated the interactions between DElncRNAs and other RNAs, specifically MSTRG.12741.1, MSTRG.11848.1, MSTRG.5895.1, and MSTRG.14070.1, involved in regulating drug stimulation through cis/trans/antisense/lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA interaction networks. This regulation leads to a decrease (or increase) in the expression of relevant genes, consequently enhancing the resistance of H. contortus to albendazole. Furthermore, through comprehensive analysis of competitive endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) involved in drug resistance-related pathways, such as the mTOR signalling pathway and ABC transporter signalling pathway, the relevance of the MSTRG.2499.1-novel-m0062-3p-HCON_00099610 interaction was identified to mainly involve the regulation of catalytic activity, metabolism, ubiquitination and transcriptional regulation of gene promoters. Additionally, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) validation indicated that the transcription profiles of six DElncRNAs and six DEmRNAs were consistent with those obtained by RNA-seq. Conclusions The results of the present study allowed us to better understand the changes in the lncRNA expression profile of ABZ-resistant H. contortus. In total, these results suggest that the lncRNAs MSTRG.963.1, MSTRG.12741.1, MSTRG.11848.1 and MSTRG.2499.1 play important roles in the development of ABZ resistance and can serve as promising biomarkers for further study.
Background Plant growth-regulating factors (GRFs) and GRF-interacting factors (GIFs) interact with each other and collectively have important regulatory roles in plant growth, development, and stress responses. Therefore, it is of great significance to explore the systematic evolution of GRF and GIF gene families. However, our knowledge and understanding of the role of GRF and GIF genes during plant evolution has been fragmentary.Results In this study, a large number of genomic and transcriptomic datasets of algae, mosses, ferns, gymnosperms and angiosperms were used to systematically analyze the evolution of GRF and GIF genes during the evolution of plants. The results showed that GRF gene first appeared in the charophyte Klebsormidium nitens, whereas the GIF genes originated relatively early, and these two gene families were mainly expanded by segmental duplication events after plant terrestrialization. During the process of evolution, the protein sequences and functions of GRF and GIF family genes are relatively conservative. As cooperative partner, GRF and GIF genes contain the similar types of cis-acting elements in their promoter regions, which enables them to have similar transcriptional response patterns, and both show higher levels of expression in reproductive organs and tissues and organs with strong capacity for cell division. Based on protein-protein interaction analysis and verification, we found that the GRF-GIF protein partnership began to be established in pteridophytes and is highly conserved across different terrestrial plants.Conclusions These results provide a foundation for further exploration of the molecular evolution and biological functions of GRF and GIF genes.
Background Incubation behaviour, an instinct for natural breeding in poultry, is strictly controlled by the central nervous system and multiple neuroendocrine hormones and neurotransmitters, and is closely associated with the cessation of egg laying. Therefore, it is essential for the commercial poultry industry to clarify the molecular regulation mechanism of incubation behaviour. Here, we used high-throughput sequencing technology to examine the pituitary transcriptome of Changshun green-shell laying hen, a local breed from Guizhou province, China, with strong broodiness, in two reproductive stages, including egg-laying phase (LP) and incubation phase (BP). We also analyze the differences in gene expression during the transition from egg-laying to incubation, and identify critical pathways and candidate genes involved in controlling the incubation behaviour in the pituitary.Results In this study, we demonstrated that a total of 2089 differently expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the pituitary, including 842 up-regulated and 1247 down-regulated genes. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis revealed that steroid biosynthesis pathway and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction were significantly enriched based on DEGs commonly identified in pituitary. Further analysis revealed that SRC, ITGB4, ITGB3, PIK3R3 and DRD2 may play crucial roles in the regulation of incubation behaviour.Conclusions We identified 2089 DEGs and the key signaling pathways which may be closely correlated with incubation in Changshun green-shell laying hens, and clarified the molecular regulation mechanism of incubation behaviour. Our results indicate the complexity and variety of differences in reproductive behaviour of different chicken breeds.
Background Hylurgus ligniperda (Coleoptera: Curculionidae) is a worldwide forest quarantine pest. It is widely distributed, has many host tree species, and possesses strong adaptability. To explore its environmental adaptability and the related molecular mechanisms, we conducted chromosome-level genome sequencing and analyzed the transcriptome under different environmental factors, identifying key expressed genes. Results We employed PacBio, Illumina, and Hi-C sequencing techniques to assemble a 520 Mb chromosomal-level genome of H. ligniperda, obtaining an N50 of 39.97 Mb across 138 scaffolds. A total of 10,765 protein-coding genes were annotated after repeat masking. Fourteen chromosomes were identified, among which Hyli14 was determined to be the sex chromosome. Survival statistics were tested over various growth periods under high temperature and low humidity conditions. The maximum survival period of adults reached 292 days at 25 degrees C, 65% relative humidity. In comparison, the maximum survival period was 14 days under 35 degrees C, 65% relative humidity, and 106 days under 25 degrees C, 40% relative humidity. This indicated that environmental stress conditions significantly reduced adults' survival period. We further conducted transcriptome analysis to screen for potentially influential differentially expressed genes, such as CYP450 and Histone. Subsequently, we performed gene family analysis to gain insights into their functions and interactions, such as CYP450 and Histone. CYP450 genes affected the detoxification metabolism of enzymes in the Cytochrome P450 pathway to adapt to different environments. Histone genes are involved in insect hormone biosynthesis and longevity-regulating pathways in H. ligniperda to adapt to environmental stress. Conclusions The genome at the chromosome level of H. ligniperda was assembled for the first time. The mortality of H. ligniperda increased significantly at 35 degree celsius, 65% RH, and 25 degree celsius, 40% RH. CYP450 and Histone genes played an important role in response to environmental stress. This genome offers a substantial genetic resource for investigating the molecular mechanisms behind beetle invasion and spread.
Enterococcus faecalis, a formidable nosocomial and community-acquired opportunistic pathogen, can persist a wide range of extreme environments, including low pH and nutrient deficiency. Clarifying the survival mechanism of E. faecalis in low-pH conditions is the key to combating the infectious diseases caused by E. faecalis. In this study, we combined transcriptome profiling (RNA-seq) and transposon insertion sequencing (TIS) to comprehensively understand the genes that confer these features on E. faecalis. The metadata showed that genes whose products are involved in cation transportation and amino acid biosynthesis were predominantly differentially expressed under acid conditions. The products of genes such as opp1C and copY reduced the hydrion concentration in the cell, whereas those of gldA2, gnd2, ubiD, and ubiD2 mainly participated in amino metabolism, increasing matters to neutralize excess acid. These, together with the folE and hexB genes, which are involved in mismatch repair, form a network of E. faecalis genes necessary for its survival under acid conditions.
Background The KT/HAK/KUP is the largest K+ transporter family in plants, playing crucial roles in K+ absorption, transport, and defense against environmental stress. Sweet watermelon is an economically significant horticultural crop belonging to the genus Citrullus, with a high demand for K+ during its growth process. However, a comprehensive analysis of the KT/HAK/KUP gene family in watermelon has not been reported. Results 14 KT/HAK/KUP genes were identified in the genomes of each of seven Citrullus species. These KT/HAK/KUPs in watermelon were unevenly distributed across seven chromosomes. Segmental duplication is the primary driving force behind the expansion of the KT/HAK/KUP family, subjected to purifying selection during domestication (Ka/Ks < 1), and all KT/HAK/KUPs exhibit conserved motifs and could be phylogenetically classified into four groups. The promoters of KT/HAK/KUPs contain numerous cis-regulatory elements related to plant growth and development, phytohormone response, and stress response. Under K+ deficiency, the growth of watermelon seedlings was significantly inhibited, with cultivated watermelon experiencing greater impacts (canopy width, redox enzyme activity) compared to the wild type. All KT/HAK/KUPs in C. lanatus and C. amarus exhibit specific expression responses to K+-deficiency and drought stress by qRT-PCR. Notably, ClG42_07g0120700/CaPI482276_07g014010 were predominantly expressed in roots and were further induced by K+-deficiency and drought stress. Additionally, the K+ transport capacity of ClG42_07g0120700 under low K+ stress was confirmed by yeast functional complementation assay. Conclusions KT/HAK/KUP genes in watermelon were systematically identified and analyzed at the pangenome level and provide a foundation for understanding the classification and functions of the KT/HAK/KUPs in watermelon plants.
Background China is the hotspot of global freshwater crab diversity, but their wild populations are facing severe pressures associated with anthropogenic factors, necessitating the need to map their taxonomic and genetic diversity and design conservation policies. Results Herein, we sequenced the mitochondrial genome of a Chinese freshwater crab species Bottapotamon fukienense, and found that it is fragmented into two chromosomes. We confirmed that fragmentation was not limited to a single specimen or population. Chromosome 1 comprised 15,111 base pairs (bp) and there were 26 genes and one pseudogene (pseudo-nad1) encoded on it. Chromosome 2 comprised 8,173 bp and there were 12 genes and two pseudogenes (pseudo-trnL2 and pseudo-rrnL) encoded on it. Combined, they comprise the largest mitogenome (23,284 bp) among the Potamidae. Bottapotamon was the only genus in the Potamidae dataset exhibiting rearrangements of protein-coding genes. Bottapotamon fukienense exhibited average rates of sequence evolution in the dataset and did not differ in selection pressures from the remaining Potamidae. Conclusions This is the first experimentally confirmed fragmentation of a mitogenome in crustaceans. While the mitogenome of B. fukienense exhibited multiple signs of elevated mitogenomic architecture evolution rates, including the exceptionally large size, duplicated genes, pseudogenisation, rearrangements of protein-coding genes, and fragmentation, there is no evidence that this is matched by elevated sequence evolutionary rates or changes in selection pressures.
BackgroundThe evolution of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) persists, giving rise to new variants characterized by mutations in the spike protein. However, public data regarding the virus's evolutionary trend is not widely available after the downgrade of coronavirus disease 2019(COVID-19). Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the applicability of an in-house Sanger-based method for identifying SARS-CoV-2 variants, particularly focusing on newly emerged Omicron variants, and updating the epidemiology of COVID-19 during the 8th wave in Hiroshima Prefecture.ResultsA total of 639 saliva samples of individuals who had tested positive for COVID-19, received from Hiroshima City Medical Association Clinical Laboratory Center between February 01, 2023, and March 12, 2024, were included in the study. SARS-CoV-2 variants were identified in 69.3% (443/639) with the mean viral titer 2 x 106 copies/mL, and high viral titer in Omicron variant XBC.1.6* (5 x 108 copies/mL) using RT-qPCR. By partial Spike gene-based sequencing using the Sanger Sequencing strategy, Omicron sub-lineages XXB.1, BA.5, and EG.1 were identified during different periods. A comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of 7383 SARS-CoV-2 strains retrieved from GISAID, collected in Hiroshima from the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020 until July 2024, revealed the dynamic evolution of SARS-CoV-2 variants over time. The study found a similar pattern of variant distribution between the full genomes from GISAID, and the partial genomes obtained from our screening strategy during the same period.ConclusionsOur study revealed that all SARS-CoV-2 viruses circulated in Hiroshima were Omicron variants and their sub-lineages during the 8th wave outbreak in Hiroshima. Persistent molecular surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 is needed for the decision-making and strategic planning of the public promptly. Our study added evidence for the usefulness of SARS-CoV-2 spike gene partial sequencing-based SARS-CoV-2 variant identification strategy for mass screening and molecular surveillance even though the evolution of newly emerged various SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variants.
Prediction of chromatin interactions from DNA sequence has been a significant research challenge in the last couple of years. Several solutions have been proposed, most of which are based on encoder-decoder architecture, where 1D sequence is convoluted, encoded into the latent representation, and then decoded using 2D convolutions into the Hi-C pairwise chromatin spatial proximity matrix. Those methods, while obtaining high correlation scores and improved metrics, produce Hi-C matrices that are artificial - they are blurred due to the deep learning model architecture. In our study, we propose the HiCDiffusion, sequence-only model that addresses this problem. We first train the encoder-decoder neural network and then use it as a component of the diffusion model - where we guide the diffusion using a latent representation of the sequence, as well as the final output from the encoder-decoder. That way, we obtain the high-resolution Hi-C matrices that not only better resemble the experimental results - improving the Fr & eacute;chet inception distance by an average of 11 times, with the highest improvement of 56 times - but also obtain similar classic metrics to current state-of-the-art encoder-decoder architectures used for the task.
Background Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) rare disease due to the pathogenic variant of the NADH dehydrogenase enzyme. LHON is characterized by a sudden central vision loss due to focal degeneration of the retinal ganglion cell layer and optic nerve. Symptoms usually appear between the age of 18 and 35 years. Some individuals present the mtDNA mutations but not presented the LHON clinical features. The heteroplasmic or homoplasmic character of the mutations among patients explains why they develop the disease or not even though they carry the pathogenic variant. Methods This study was performed in collaboration with the department of ophthalmology of Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. Screening for the common mutations in Mt-ND1 gene (m.3460G > A), Mt-ND4 gene (m.11778G > A) and Mt-ND6 gene (m.14484T > C) was performed in five Tunisian families by standard RFLP PCR, followed by direct sequencing of the entire of these genes. Indeed, bioinformatics tools were used to predict the potential functional impact of the identified mutations on the Human mitochondrial respiratory complex I protein. Results one novel p.L601M (m.1413 C > A) and four previously reported mutations were identified in this study including: rs199476112G > A (m.11778G > A); rs202227543G > A (m.14258G > A); rs1603224763 (m.14510 dup) and NC_012920.1: m.3244G > C. In this present report, only one patient was found carrying the primary point mutation (m. 11778G > A). The ophthalmologic findings showing major fundus changes included hyperemic optic discs; disc pseudo-oedema and microangiopathy leading to optic disc atrophy. The analyses of the stability of protein upon identified mutations using DynaMut tool server demonstrated that these variations induce a rigidification in the region where they are located. Conclusion This is the first Tunisian report of mtDNA mutations identified in Tunisia causing the LHON. The main factors involved in the pathophysiological mechanisms of this disease are genetic, epigenetic, hormonal and environmental influences.
BackgroundMucopolysaccharidosis type I is a lysosomal storage disease resulting from a deficiency in alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA), which causes the accumulation of partially degraded dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate. This retrospective study, spanning eight years, analyzed data from 45 MPSI patients. The report aimed to explore the potential origin of the p.P533R mutation in the Maghrebin population by constructing a single-nucleotide polymorphism haplotype around the IDUA gene, in order to propose a molecular proof of a founder effect of the MPSI/p.P533R allele.Patients and methodsAll of the studied patients were from Libya (2), Mauritania (1) Morocco (21) and Tunisia (21) with first cousins being the most frequent union. The diagnosis of MPSI patients often involves the combination of urinary screening, leukocyte IDUA activity determination, and DNA molecular analysis. In our study, to identify the common p.P533R mutation, we performed both DNA sequencing and tetra-primer ARMS PCR assay. Additionally, Haploview was used to determine the specific haplotype that cosegregates with the p.P533R mutation. Controls were genotyped to ensure that all the SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.ResultsIn the present report we confirmed the very strong impact of consanguinity on the incidence of MPSI disease. Furthermore, studied families of mixed ancestry shared common and specific haplotype, which was observed in studied populations, suggesting the presence of a founder effect in the North Africa.ConclusionThe p.P533R missense mutation was identified in each patient originated from Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia. Furthermore, these MPSI patients exhibited the same IDUA haplotype. The occurrence of a shared AAGGGTG haplotype, among North African populations may be attributed to substantial historical gene exchange between these groups, likely stemming from migration, inter-ethnic marriage, or other forms of interaction throughout history.
Background Enterococcus faecium and E. lactis are phylogenetically closely related lactic acid bacteria that are ubiquitous in nature and are known to be beneficial or pathogenic. Despite their considerable industrial and clinical importance, comprehensive studies on their evolutionary relationships and genomic, metabolic, and pathogenic traits are still lacking. Therefore, we conducted comparative pangenome analyses using all available dereplicated genomes of these species.Results E. faecium was divided into two subclades: subclade I, comprising strains derived from humans, animals, and food, and the more recent phylogenetic subclade II, consisting exclusively of human-derived strains. In contrast, E. lactis strains, isolated from diverse sources including foods, humans, animals, and the environment, did not display distinct clustering based on their isolation sources. Despite having similar metabolic features, noticeable genomic differences were observed between E. faecium subclades I and II, as well as E. lactis. Notably, E. faecium subclade II strains exhibited significantly larger genome sizes and higher gene counts compared to both E. faecium subclade I and E. lactis strains. Furthermore, they carried a higher abundance of antibiotic resistance, virulence, bacteriocin, and mobile element genes. Phylogenetic analysis of antibiotic resistance and virulence genes suggests that E. faecium subclade II strains likely acquired these genes through horizontal gene transfer, facilitating their effective adaptation in response to antibiotic use in humans.Conclusions Our study offers valuable insights into the adaptive evolution of E. faecium strains, enabling their survival as pathogens in the human environment through horizontal gene acquisitions.
Background Daphnia galeata is a suitable model organism for investigating predator-induced defense. Genes and pathways exhibiting differential expression between fish kairomone-treated and untreated groups in D. galeata have been identified. However, understanding of the significance of alternative splicing, a crucial process of the regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes, to this mechanism remains limited. This study measured life-history traits and conducted short-read RNA sequencing and long-read isoform sequencing of two Korean D. galeata genotypes (KB1 and KE2) to uncover the genetic mechanism underlying their phenotypic plasticity under predation stress. Results KB1 exhibited strategies to enhance fertility and decrease body length when exposed to fish kairomones, while KE2 deployed an adaptive strategy to increase body length. Full-length transcriptomes from KB1 and KE2 yielded 65,736 and 57,437 transcripts, respectively, of which 32 differentially expressed transcripts (DETs) were shared under predation stress across both genotypes. Prominent DETs common to both genotypes were related to energy metabolism and the immune system. Additionally, differential alternative splicing (DAS) events were detected in both genotypes in response to fish kairomones. DAS genes shared between both genotypes may indicate their significant role in the post-transcriptional stress response to fish predation. Calpain-3, involved in digestion and nutrient absorption, was identified as a DAS gene in both genotypes when exposed to fish kairomones. In addition, the gene encoding thymosin beta, which is related to growth, was found to be a statistically significant DAS only in KB1, while that encoding ultraspiracle protein, also associated with growth, was only identified in KE2. Moreover, transcripts encoding proteins such as EGF-like domain-containing protein, vitellogenin fused with superoxide dismutase, and others were identified overlapping between DAS events and DETs and potentially elucidating their association with the observed phenotypic variation in each genotype. Conclusions Our findings highlight the crucial role of alternative splicing in modulating transcriptome landscape under predation stress in D. galeata, emphasizing the requirement for integrating gene expression and splicing analyses in evolutionary adaptation studies.
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a persistent environmental contaminant that disrupts hepatic function leading to steatotic liver disease (SLD)-like pathologies, such as steatosis, steatohepatitis, and fibrosis. These effects are mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor following changes in gene expression. Although diverse cell types are involved, initial cell-specific changes in gene expression have not been reported. In this study, differential gene expression in hepatic cell types was examined in male C57BL/6 mice gavaged with 30 mu g/kg of TCDD using single-nuclei RNA-sequencing. Ten liver cell types were identified with the proportions of most cell types remaining unchanged, except for neutrophils which increased at 72 h. Gene expression suggests TCDD induced genes related to oxidative stress in hepatocytes as early as 2 h. Lipid homeostasis was disrupted in hepatocytes, macrophages, B cells, and T cells, characterized by the induction of genes associated with lipid transport, steroid hormone biosynthesis, and the suppression of beta-oxidation, while linoleic acid metabolism was altered in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), B cells, portal fibroblasts, and plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Pro-fibrogenic processes were also enriched, including the induction retinol metabolism genes in HSCs and the early induction of anti-fibrolysis genes in hepatocytes, endothelial cells, HSCs, and macrophages. Hepatocytes also had gene expression changes consistent with hepatocellular carcinoma. Collectively, these findings underscore the effects of TCDD in initiating SLD-like phenotypes and identified cell-specific gene expression changes related to oxidative stress, steatosis, fibrosis, cell proliferation and the development of HCC.
Background Lanping black-boned sheep (LPB) represent a distinctive mammalian species characterized by hyperpigmentation, resulting in black bone and muscle features, in contrast to their conventional counterparts exhibiting red muscle and white bone. The genetic basis underlying LPB hyperpigmentation has remained enigmatic. Methods In this study, we conducted whole-genome sequencing of 100 LPB and 50 Lanping normal sheep (LPN), and integrated this data with 421 sequenced datasets from wild and domestic sheep, shedding light on the genetic backdrop and genomic variations associated with LPB. Furthermore, we performed comparative RNA-Seq analysis using liver sample to pinpoint genes implicated in the pigmentation process. We generated a comprehensive dataset comprising 97,944,357 SNPs from 571 sheep, facilitating an in-depth exploration of genetic factors. Results Population genetic structure analysis revealed that the LPB breed traces its origin back to LPN, having evolved into a distinct breed. The integration of positively selected genes with differentially expressed genes identified two candidates, ERBB4 and ROR1, potentially linked to LPB hyperpigmentation. Comparative analysis of ERBB4 and ROR1 mRNA relative expression levels in liver, spleen, and kidney tissues of LPB, in comparison to Diqing sheep, revealed significant upregulation, except for ERBB4 in the liver. Gene expression heatmaps further underscored marked allelic frequency disparities in different populations. Conclusion Our findings establish the evolutionary lineage of the LPB breed from LPN and underscore the involvement of ERBB4 and ROR1 genes in melanin synthesis. These results enhance our comprehension of the molecular basis of hyperpigmentation and contribute to a more comprehensive depiction of sheep diversity.
Background The Apetala 2/ethylene-responsive factor family has diverse functions that enhance development and torment resistance in the plant genome. In variation, the ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) family of TF's genes is extensive in the crop genome. Generally, the plant-specific ethylene-responsive factor family may divided by the dehydration-responsive element-binding (DREB) subfamily. So, the AP2/ERF super-family demonstrated the repeated AP2 domain during growth. The sole AP2 domain function represents abiotic stress resistance. Also, the AP2 with B3 domain enhances during the replication of brassinosteroid.Objective The study objective is to investigate the Apetala 2/ethylene-responsive factor family in a model organism of the Arabidopsis thaliana for comparative analysis towards Solanum lycopersicum (Tomato), Brassica juncea (Indian and Chinese mustard), Zea mays L. (Maize) and Oryza sativa (Indian and Japanese Rice). So, examinations of the large AP2/ERF super-family are mandatory to explore the Apetala 2 (AP2) family, ERF family, DREB subfamily, and RAV family involved during growth and abiotic stress stimuli in crops.Methods Therefore, perform bioinformatics and computational methods to the current knowledge of the Apetala 2/ethylene-responsive factor family and their subfamilies in the crop genome. This method may be valuable for functional analysis of particular genes and their families in the plant genome.Results Observation data provided evidence of the Apetala 2/ethylene-responsive factor (AP2/ERF) super-family and their sub-family present in Arabidopsis thaliana (Dicots) and compared with Solanum lycopersicum (Dicots), Brassica juncea (Dicots), Zea mays L. (Monocots) and Oryza sativa (Monocots). Also, remarks genes in Oryza sativa. This report upgraded the Apetala 2/ethylene-responsive factor (AP2/ERF) family in the crop genome. So, the analysis documented the conserved domain, motifs, and phylogenetic tree towards Dicots and Monocots species. Those outcomes will be valuable for future studies of the defensive Apetala 2/ethylene-responsive factor family in crops.Conclusion Therefore, the study concluded that the several species-specific TF genes in the Apetala 2/ethylene-responsive factor (AP2/ERF) family in Arabidopsis thaliana and compared with crop-species of Solanum lycopersicum, Brassica juncea, Zea mays L. and Oryza sativa. Those plant-specific genes regulate during growth and abiotic stress control in plants. Highlights center dot The study is significantly associated with crop development.center dot The developmental and abiotic stress-responsible gene families observed in different crops.center dot TheAP2 familyoriginated during the growing embryo, leaf, and flower. center dot The ERF/DREB families initiated abiotic stress such as freezing, drought, salt, low oxygen, oxidative, osmotic, heat, heavy metals, and soil salinity.center dot Finally, the RAV family implicated the solution of brassinosteroid.center dot So, the analysis data provided valuable information for the Department of Agriculture Biotechnology.center dot Also, the documented data are valuable for the plant database and research.
BackgroundVernicia montana and V. fordii are economically important woody oil species in the Euphorbiaceae that have great industrial oil and ornamental greening properties, however, the wild resources of Vernicia trees have been reduced because of their habitat destruction. Considering the diverse economic and ecological importance of Vernicia species, it is important to collect more molecular data to determine the genetic differences between V. montana and V. fordii.ResultsWe sequenced, assembled, and annotated the complete chloroplast (CP) genome of two tung trees based on the genome skimming approach. The whole CP genomes of V. montana and V. fordii were 163,518 bp and 161,495 bp in length, both including a pair of inverted repeats separated by a large single-copy and a small single-copy region. We detected a total number of 311 tandem repeats, 100 dispersed repeats, and 255 simple repeats from V. montana and V. fordii CP genomes. The mean value of nucleotide diversity between the two species was 0.0122, and the average Ka/Ks ratio across all coding genes was 0.3483. Comparative chloroplast genome analysis showed that the coding regions were more conserved than the non-coding regions. The phylogenetic relationships yielded by the complete genome sequences showed that V. montana was closely related to V. fordii and is considered as a sister group.ConclusionsWe sequenced, assembled, annotated, and analyzed the CP genome of two tung trees, which will be useful in investigating the conservation genetics and potential breeding applications of this oil shrub.
We developed an automated high-throughput Smart-seq3 (HT Smart-seq3) workflow that integrates best practices and an optimized protocol to enhance efficiency, scalability, and method reproducibility. This workflow consistently produces high-quality data with high cell capture efficiency and gene detection sensitivity. In a rigorous comparison with the 10X platform using human primary CD4 + T-cells, HT Smart-seq3 demonstrated higher cell capture efficiency, greater gene detection sensitivity, and lower dropout rates. Additionally, when sufficiently scaled, HT Smart-seq3 achieved a comparable resolution of cellular heterogeneity to 10X. Notably, through T-cell receptor (TCR) reconstruction, HT Smart-seq3 identified a greater number of productive alpha and beta chain pairs without the need for additional primer design to amplify full-length V(D)J segments, enabling more comprehensive TCR profiling across a broader range of species. Taken together, HT Smart-seq3 overcomes key technical challenges, offering distinct advantages that position it as a promising solution for the characterization of single-cell transcriptomes and immune repertoires, particularly well-suited for low-input, low-RNA content samples.
Background Spinach downy mildew, caused by the obligate oomycete pathogen, Peronospora effusa remains a major concern for spinach production. Disease control is predominantly based on development of resistant spinach cultivars. However, new races and novel isolates of the pathogen continue to emerge and overcome cultivar resistance. Currently there are 20 known races of P. effusa. Here we characterized the transcriptomes of spinach, Spinacia oleracea, and P. effusa during disease progression using the spinach cultivar Viroflay, the near isogenic lines NIL1 and NIL3, and P. effusa races, R13 and R19, at 24 h post inoculation and 6 days post inoculation. A total of 54 samples were collected and subjected to sequencing and transcriptomic analysis. Results Differentially expressed gene (DEG) analysis in resistant spinach interactions of R13-NIL1 and R19-NIL3 revealed spinach DEGs from protein kinase-like and P-loop containing families, which have roles in plant defense. The homologous plant defense genes included but were not limited to, receptor-like protein kinases (Spiol0281C06495, Spiol06Chr21559 and Spiol06Chr24027), a BAK1 homolog (Spiol0223C05961), genes with leucine rich repeat motifs (Spiol04Chr08771, Spiol04Chr01972, Spiol05Chr26812, Spiol04Chr11049, Spiol0084S08137, Spiol03Chr20299) and ABC-transporters (Spiol02Chr28975, Spiol06Chr22112, Spiol06Chr03998 and Spiol04Chr09723). Additionally, analysis of the expression of eight homologous to previously reported downy mildew resistance genes revealed that some are differentially expressed during resistant reactions but not during susceptible reactions. Examination of P. effusa gene expression during infection of susceptible cultivars identified expressed genes present in R19 or R13 including predicted RxLR and Crinkler effector genes that may be responsible for race-specific virulence on NIL1 or NIL3 spinach hosts, respectively. Conclusions These findings deliver foundational insight to gene expression in both spinach and P. effusa during susceptible and resistant interactions and provide a library of candidate genes for further exploration and functional analysis. Such resources will be beneficial to spinach breeding efforts for disease resistance in addition to better understanding the virulence mechanisms of this obligate pathogen.
Background The ascomycete fungus Anisogramma anomala causes Eastern Filbert Blight (EFB) on hazelnut (Corylus spp.) trees. It is a minor disease on its native host, the American hazelnut (C. americana), but is highly destructive on the commercially important European hazelnut (C. avellana). In North America, EFB has historically limited commercial production of hazelnut to west of the Rocky Mountains. A. anomala is an obligately biotrophic fungus that has not been grown in continuous culture, rendering its study challenging. There is a 15-month latency before symptoms appear on infected hazelnut trees, and only a sexual reproductive stage has been observed. Here we report the sequencing, annotation, and characterization of its genome. Results The genome of A. anomala was assembled into 108 scaffolds totaling 342,498,352 nt with a GC content of 34.46%. Scaffold N50 was 33.3 Mb and L50 was 5. Nineteen scaffolds with lengths over 1 Mb constituted 99% of the assembly. Telomere sequences were identified on both ends of two scaffolds and on one end of another 10 scaffolds. Flow cytometry estimated the genome size of A. anomala at 370 Mb. The genome exhibits two-speed evolution, with 93% of the assembly as AT-rich regions (32.9% GC) and the other 7% as GC-rich (57.1% GC). The AT-rich regions consist predominantly of repeats with low gene content, while 90% of predicted protein coding genes were identified in GC-rich regions. Copia-like retrotransposons accounted for more than half of the genome. Evidence of repeat-induced point mutation (RIP) was identified throughout the AT-rich regions, and two copies of the rid gene and one of dim-2, the key genes in the RIP mutation pathway, were identified in the genome. Consistent with its homothallic sexual reproduction cycle, both MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 idiomorphs were found. We identified a large suite of genes likely involved in pathogenicity, including 614 carbohydrate active enzymes, 762 secreted proteins and 165 effectors. Conclusions This study reveals the genomic structure, composition, and putative gene function of the important pathogen A. anomala. It provides insight into the molecular basis of the pathogen's life cycle and a solid foundation for studying EFB.
Due to limitations in conventional disease vector control strategies including the rise of insecticide resistance in natural populations of mosquitoes, genetic control strategies using CRISPR gene drive systems have been under serious consideration. The identification of CRISPR target sites in mosquito populations is a key aspect for developing efficient genetic vector control strategies. While genome-wide Cas9 target sites have been explored in mosquitoes, a precise evaluation of target sites focused on coding sequence (CDS) is lacking. Additionally, target site polymorphisms have not been characterized for other nucleases such as Cas12a, which require a different DNA recognition site (PAM) and would expand the accessibility of mosquito genomes for genetic engineering. We undertook a comprehensive analysis of potential target sites for both Cas9 and Cas12a nucleases within the genomes of natural populations of Anopheles gambiae and Aedes aegypti from multiple continents. We demonstrate that using two nucleases increases the number of targets per gene. Also, we identified differences in nucleotide diversity between North American and African Aedes populations, impacting the abundance of good target sites with a minimal degree of polymorphisms that can affect the binding of gRNA. Lastly, we screened for gRNAs targeting sex-determination genes that could be widely applicable for developing field genetic control strategies. Overall, this work highlights the utility of employing both Cas9 and Cas12a nucleases and underscores the importance of designing universal genetic strategies adaptable to diverse mosquito populations.
BackgroundUnderstanding the molecular underpinnings of phenotypic variations is critical for enhancing poultry breeding programs. The Brazilian broiler (TT) and laying hen (CC) lines exhibit striking differences in body weight, growth potential, and muscle mass. Our work aimed to compare the global transcriptome of wing and pectoral tissues during the early development (days 2.5 to 3.5) of these chicken lines, unveiling disparities in gene expression and regulation.ResultsDifferent and bona-fide transcriptomic profiles were identified for the compared lines. A similar number of up- and downregulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, considering the broiler line as a reference. Upregulated DEGs displayed an enrichment of protease-encoding genes, whereas downregulated DEGs exhibited a prevalence of receptors and ligands. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that upregulated DEGs were mainly associated with hormone response, mitotic cell cycle, and different metabolic and biosynthetic processes. In contrast, downregulated DEGs were primarily linked to communication, signal transduction, cell differentiation, and nervous system development. Regulatory networks were constructed for the mitotic cell cycle and cell differentiation biological processes, as their contrasting roles may impact the development of distinct postnatal traits. Within the mitotic cell cycle network, key upregulated DEGs included CCND1 and HSP90, with central regulators being NF-kappa B subunits (RELA and REL) and NFATC2. The cell differentiation network comprises numerous DEGs encoding transcription factors (e.g., HOX genes), receptors, ligands, and histones, while the main regulatory hubs are CREB, AR and epigenetic modifiers. Clustering analyses highlighted PIK3CD as a central player within the differentiation network.ConclusionsOur study revealed distinct developmental transcriptomes between Brazilian broiler and layer lines. The gene expression profile of broiler embryos seems to favour increased cell proliferation and delayed differentiation, which may contribute to the subsequent enlargement of pectoral tissues during foetal and postnatal development. Our findings pave the way for future functional studies and improvement of targeted traits of economic interest in poultry.
BackgroundCentral Michigan University (CMU) participated in a state-wide SARS-CoV-2 wastewater monitoring program since 2021. Wastewater samples were collected from on-campus sites and nine off-campus wastewater treatment plants servicing small metropolitan and rural communities. SARS-CoV-2 genome copies were quantified using droplet digital PCR and results were reported to the health department.ResultsOne rural, off-campus site consistently produced higher concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 genome copies. Samples from this site were sequenced and contained predominately a derivative of Alpha variant lineage B.1.1.7, detected from fall 2021 through summer 2023. Mutational analysis of reconstructed genes revealed divergence from the Alpha variant lineage sequence over time, including numerous mutations in the Spike RBD and NTD.ConclusionsWe discuss the possibility that a chronic SARS-CoV-2 infection accumulated adaptive mutations that promoted long-term infection. This study reveals that small wastewater treatment plants can enhance resolution of rare events and facilitate reconstruction of viral genomes due to the relative lack of contaminating sequences.
Background Microbial genomes are largely comprised of protein coding sequences, yet some genomes contain many pseudogenes caused by frameshifts or internal stop codons. These pseudogenes are believed to result from gene degradation during evolution but could also be technical artifacts of genome sequencing or assembly. Results Using a combination of observational and experimental data, we show that many putative pseudogenes are attributable to errors that are incorporated into genomes during assembly. Within 126,564 publicly available genomes, we observed that nearly identical genomes often substantially differed in pseudogene counts. Causal inference implicated assembler, sequencing platform, and coverage as likely causative factors. Reassembly of genomes from raw reads confirmed that each variable affects the number of putative pseudogenes in an assembly. Furthermore, simulated sequencing reads corroborated our observations that the quality and quantity of raw data can significantly impact the number of pseudogenes in an assembler dependent fashion. The number of unexpected pseudogenes due to internal stops was highly correlated (R-2 = 0.96) with average nucleotide identity to the ground truth genome, implying relative pseudogene counts can be used as a proxy for overall assembly correctness. Applying our method to assemblies in RefSeq resulted in rejection of 3.6% of assemblies due to significantly elevated pseudogene counts. Reassembly from real reads obtained from high coverage genomes showed considerable variability in spurious pseudogenes beyond that observed with simulated reads, reinforcing the finding that high coverage is necessary to mitigate assembly errors. Conclusions Collectively, these results demonstrate that many pseudogenes in microbial genome assemblies are actually genes. Our results suggest that high read coverage is required for correct assembly and indicate an inflated number of pseudogenes due to internal stops is indicative of poor overall assembly quality.
BackgroundStaphylococci cause a wide range of infections, including implant-associated infections which are difficult to treat due to the presence of biofilms. Whilst some proteins involved in biofilm formation are known, the differences in biofilm production between staphylococcal species remains understudied. Currently biofilm formation by Staphylococcus aureus is better understood than other members of the genus as more research has focused on this species.ResultsWe assembled a panel of 385 non-aureus Staphylococcus isolates of 19 species from a combination of clinical sources and reference strains. We used a high-throughput crystal violet assay to assess the biofilm forming ability of all strains and assign distinct biofilm formation categories. We compared the prevalence of Pfam domains between the categories and used machine learning to identify amino acid 20-mers linked to biofilm formation.This identified some domains within proteins already linked to biofilm formation and important domains not previously linked to biofilm formation in staphylococci. RT-qPCR confirmed the expression of selected genes predicted to encode important domains within biofilms in Staphylococcus epidermidis.The prevalence and distribution of biofilm associated domains showed a link to phylogeny, suggesting different Staphylococcus species have independently evolved different mechanisms of biofilm production.ResultsWe assembled a panel of 385 non-aureus Staphylococcus isolates of 19 species from a combination of clinical sources and reference strains. We used a high-throughput crystal violet assay to assess the biofilm forming ability of all strains and assign distinct biofilm formation categories. We compared the prevalence of Pfam domains between the categories and used machine learning to identify amino acid 20-mers linked to biofilm formation.This identified some domains within proteins already linked to biofilm formation and important domains not previously linked to biofilm formation in staphylococci. RT-qPCR confirmed the expression of selected genes predicted to encode important domains within biofilms in Staphylococcus epidermidis.The prevalence and distribution of biofilm associated domains showed a link to phylogeny, suggesting different Staphylococcus species have independently evolved different mechanisms of biofilm production.ResultsWe assembled a panel of 385 non-aureus Staphylococcus isolates of 19 species from a combination of clinical sources and reference strains. We used a high-throughput crystal violet assay to assess the biofilm forming ability of all strains and assign distinct biofilm formation categories. We compared the prevalence of Pfam domains between the categories and used machine learning to identify amino acid 20-mers linked to biofilm formation.This identified some domains within proteins already linked to biofilm formation and important domains not previously linked to biofilm formation in staphylococci. RT-qPCR confirmed the expression of selected genes predicted to encode important domains within biofilms in Staphylococcus epidermidis.The prevalence and distribution of biofilm associated domains showed a link to phylogeny, suggesting different Staphylococcus species have independently evolved different mechanisms of biofilm production.ConclusionsThis work has identified different routes to biofilm formation in diverse species of Staphylococcus and suggests independent evolution of biofilm has occurred multiple times across the genus.
Background The spread of Popillia japonica in non-native areas (USA, Canada, the Azores islands, Italy and Switzerland) poses a significant threat to agriculture and horticulture, as well as to endemic floral biodiversity, entailing that appropriate control measures must be taken to reduce its density and limit its further spread. In this context, the availability of a high quality genomic sequence for the species is liable to foster basic research on the ecology and evolution of the species, as well as on possible biotechnologically-oriented and genetically-informed control measures. Results The genomic sequence presented and described here is an improvement with respect to the available draft sequence in terms of completeness and contiguity, and includes structural and functional annotations. A comparative analysis of gene families of interest, related to the species ecology and potential for polyphagy and adaptability, revealed a contraction of gustatory receptor genes and a paralogous expansion of some subgroups/subfamilies of odorant receptors, ionotropic receptors and cytochrome P450s. Conclusions The new genomic sequence as well as the comparative analyses data may provide a clue to explain the staggering invasive potential of the species and may serve to identify targets for potential biotechnological applications aimed at its control.
BackgroundGelsemium elegans is a traditional Chinese medicinal plant and temperature is one of the key factors affecting its growth. RAV (related to ABI3/VP1) transcription factor plays multiple roles in higher plants, including the regulation of plant growth, development, and stress response. However, RAV transcription factor in G. elegans has not been reported.ResultsIn this study, three novel GeRAV genes (GeRAV1-GeRAV3) were identified from the transcriptome of G. elegans under low temperature stress. Phylogenetic analysis showed that GeRAV1-GeRAV3 proteins were clustered into groups II, IV, and V, respectively. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) and real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) analyses indicated that the expression of GeRAV1 and GeRAV2 was increased in response to cold stress. Furthermore, the GeRAV1 gene was successfully cloned from G. elegans leaf. It encoded a hydrophilic, unstable, and non-secretory protein that contained both AP2 and B3 domains. The amino acid sequence of GeRAV1 protein shared a high similarity of 81.97% with Camptotheca acuminata CaRAV. Subcellular localization and transcriptional self-activation experiments demonstrated that GeRAV1 was a nucleoprotein without self-activating activity. The GeRAV1 gene was constitutively expressed in the leaves, stems, and roots of the G. elegans, with the highest expression levels in roots. In addition, the expression of the GeRAV1 gene was rapidly up-regulated under abscisic acid (ABA), salicylic acid (SA), and methyl jasmonate (MeJA) stresses, suggesting that it may be involved in hormonal signaling pathways. Moreover, GeRAV1 conferred improved cold and sodium chloride tolerance in Escherichia coli Rosetta cells.ConclusionsThese findings provided a foundation for further understanding on the function and regulatory mechanism of the GeRAV1 gene in response to low-temperature stress in G. elegans.
BackgroundThe loach (Misgurnus anguillicaudatus) is a significant freshwater economic fish in China, renowned for its tender meat, delicious taste, and high nutritional value. It is widely distributed across the country, except for the western plateau. However, the loach is currently at risk of population decline and degradation of wildlife resources. Research on genetic diversity provides a crucial foundation for the conservation and development of these fish resources. To enhance the protection and utilization of wild loach germplasm resources, we analyzed the genetic structure and diversity of 60 wild loach populations from Xiangtan City (XT), Shaoyang City (SY), and Yueyang City (XY) in Hunan, Guilin City (GL) and Guiping City (GP) in Guangxi, and Wuhan City (WH) in Hubei. Additionally, we mapped the DNA fingerprints of these 60 wild loaches using 12 high-quality SNP sites.ResultsWhole genome resequencing (WGRS) was conducted on 60 loaches from six regions, yielding a total of 1047.17 Gb of raw data and 1046.98 Gb of clean data. From this 2,812,906 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified, of which 10,022 core SNPs were selected to analyze the population genetic structure, and 12 core SNPs were used to assess the genetic diversity and DNA fingerprint. The analysis revealed that the 60 loach samples could be grouped into three clusters: Cluster A comprised the XT, SY, and XY groups; Cluster B included the WH group; and Cluster C consisted of the GL and GP groups. The mean nucleic acid diversity (Pi), heterozygosity (Ho), and expected heterozygosity (He) of SNP markers were 0.130, 0.140, and 0.123, respectively. The average inbreeding coefficient was 0.552, indicating high levels of inbreeding.ConclusionsWhole genome resequencing is an effective high-throughput approach for identifying SNP information in loach germplasm and describing genetic relationships within this genus. DNA fingerprinting based on SNP marker technology can accurately assess the genetic structure and variation within natural loach populations, making it a valuable tool for strain and variation identification. Our findings provide a scientific basis for the conservation, development, and optimal breeding of native loach germplasm resources and contribute to expanding the genetic diversity database of wild loach populations.
Background Fatty liver hemorrhagic syndrome (FLHS) in the modern poultry industry is primarily caused by nutrition. Despite encouraging progress on FLHS, the mechanism through which nutrition influences susceptibility to FLHS is still lacking in terms of epigenetics.Results In this study, we analyzed the genome-wide patterns of trimethylated lysine residue 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) enrichment by chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq), and examined its association with transcriptomes in healthy and FLHS hens. The study results indicated that H3K27me3 levels were increased in the FLHS hens on a genome-wide scale. Additionally, H3K27me3 was found to occupy the entire gene and the distant intergenic region, which may function as silencer-like regulatory elements. The analysis of transcription factor (TF) motifs in hypermethylated peaks has demonstrated that 23 TFs are involved in the regulation of liver metabolism and development. Transcriptomic analysis indicated that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were enriched in fatty acid metabolism, amino acid, and carbohydrate metabolism. The hub gene identified from PPI network is fatty acid synthase (FASN). Combined ChIP-seq and transcriptome analysis revealed that the increased H3K27me3 and down-regulated genes have significant enrichment in the ECM-receptor interaction, tight junction, cell adhesion molecules, adherens junction, and TGF-beta signaling pathways.Conclusions Overall, the trimethylation modification of H3K27 has been shown to have significant regulatory function in FLHS, mediating the expression of crucial genes associated with the ECM-receptor interaction pathway. This highlights the epigenetic mechanisms of H3K27me3 and provides insights into exploring core regulatory targets and nutritional regulation strategies in FLHS.
Background Routine genomic-estimated breeding values (gEBVs) are computed for the Israeli dairy cattle population by a two-step methodology in combination with the much larger Dutch population. Only sire genotypes are included. This work evaluated the contribution of cow genotypes obtained from the Israeli Holstein population to enhance gEBVs predictions via single-step genomic best-linear unbiased prediction (ssGBLUP). The gEBV values of 141 bulls with daughter information and high reliabilities for 305-day lactation yield of milk, fat, and protein were compared with the bulls' predicted ssGBLUP-gEBVs using a truncated dataset omitting production data of the last five years. We investigated how these sire gEBVs were affected by varying polygenic weights in the genomic relationship matrices and by deleting old phenotypic or genotypic records.
Background Standard ChIP-seq and RNA-seq processing pipelines typically disregard sequencing reads whose origin is ambiguous ("multimappers"). This usual practice has potentially important consequences for the functional interpretation of the data: genomic elements belonging to clusters composed of highly similar members are left unexplored.Results In particular, disregarding multimappers leads to the underrepresentation in epigenetic studies of recently active transposable elements, such as AluYa5, L1HS and SVAs. Furthermore, this common strategy also has implications for transcriptomic analysis: members of repetitive gene families, such the ones including major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II genes, are under-quantified.Conclusion Revealing inherent biases that permeate routine tasks such as functional enrichment analysis, our results underscore the urgency of broadly adopting multimapper-aware bioinformatic pipelines -currently restricted to specific contexts or communities- to ensure the reliability of genomic and transcriptomic studies.
Background Deciphering gene regulation is essential for understanding the underlying mechanisms of healthy and disease states. While the regulatory networks formed by transcription factors (TFs) and their target genes has been mostly studied with relation to cis effects such as in TF binding sites, we focused on trans effects of TFs on the expression of their transcribed genes and their potential mechanisms.Results We provide a comprehensive tissue-specific atlas, spanning 49 tissues of TF variations affecting gene expression through computational models considering two potential mechanisms, including combinatorial regulation by the expression of the TFs, and by genetic variants within the TF. We demonstrate that similarity between tissues based on our discovered genes corresponds to other types of tissue similarity. The genes affected by complex TF regulation, and their modelled TFs, were highly enriched for pharmacogenomic functions, while the TFs themselves were also enriched in several cancer and metabolic pathways. Additionally, genes that appear in multiple clusters are enriched for regulation of immune system while tissue clusters include cluster-specific genes that are enriched for biological functions and diseases previously associated with the tissues forming the cluster. Finally, our atlas exposes multilevel regulation across multiple tissues, where TFs regulate other TFs through the two tested mechanisms.Results We provide a comprehensive tissue-specific atlas, spanning 49 tissues of TF variations affecting gene expression through computational models considering two potential mechanisms, including combinatorial regulation by the expression of the TFs, and by genetic variants within the TF. We demonstrate that similarity between tissues based on our discovered genes corresponds to other types of tissue similarity. The genes affected by complex TF regulation, and their modelled TFs, were highly enriched for pharmacogenomic functions, while the TFs themselves were also enriched in several cancer and metabolic pathways. Additionally, genes that appear in multiple clusters are enriched for regulation of immune system while tissue clusters include cluster-specific genes that are enriched for biological functions and diseases previously associated with the tissues forming the cluster. Finally, our atlas exposes multilevel regulation across multiple tissues, where TFs regulate other TFs through the two tested mechanisms.Conclusions Our tissue-specific atlas provides hierarchical tissue-specific trans genetic regulations that can be further studied for association with human phenotypes.
Background Swamp-type buffaloes with varying degrees of white spotting are found exclusively in Tana Toraja, South Sulawesi, Indonesia, where spotted buffalo bulls are highly valued in accordance with the Torajan customs. The white spotting depigmentation is caused by the absence of melanocytes. However, the genetic variants that cause this phenotype have not been fully characterized. The objective of this study was to identify the genomic regions and variants responsible for this unique coat-color pattern. Results Genome-wide association study (GWAS) and selection signature analysis identified MITF as a key gene based on the whole-genome sequencing data of 28 solid and 39 spotted buffaloes, while KIT was also found to be involved in the development of this phenotype by a candidate gene approach. Alternative candidate mutations included, in addition to the previously reported nonsense mutation c.649 C > T (p.Arg217*) and splice donor mutation c.1179 + 2T > A in MITF, a nonsense mutation c.2028T > A (p.Tyr676*) in KIT. All these three mutations were located in the genomic regions that were highly conserved exclusively in Indonesian swamp buffaloes and they accounted largely (95%) for the manifestation of white spotting. Last but not the least, ADAMTS20 and TWIST2 may also contribute to the diversification of this coat-color pattern. Conclusions The alternative mutations identified in this study affect, at least partially and independently, the development of melanocytes. The presence and persistence of such mutations may be explained by significant financial and social value of spotted buffaloes used in historical Rambu Solo ceremony in Tana Toraja, Indonesia. Several de novo spontaneous mutations have therefore been favored by traditional breeding for the spotted buffaloes.
Mesenchymal Stem Cells are ideal seed cells for tissue repair and cell therapy and have promising applications in regenerative medicine and tissue engineering. Using Platelet-Rich Plasma as an adjuvant to create and improve the microenvironment for Mesenchymal Stem Cells growth can enhance the biological properties of Mesenchymal Stem Cells and improve the efficacy of cell therapy. However, the mechanism by which Platelet-Rich Plasma improves the biological performance of Mesenchymal Stem Cells is still unknown. In this study, by examining the effects of Platelet-Rich Plasma on the biological performance of Mesenchymal Stem Cells, combined with multiomics analysis (Transcriptomics, Proteomics and Metabolomics) and related tests, we analyzed the specific pathways, related mechanisms and metabolic pathways of Platelet-Rich Plasma to improve the biological performance of Mesenchymal Stem Cells. In an in vitro cell culture system, the biological performance of Mesenchymal Stem Cells was significantly improved after replacing Foetal Bovine Serum with Platelet-Rich Plasma, and the genes (ESM1, PDGFB, CLEC7A, CCR1 and ITGA6 et al.) related to cell proliferation, adhesion, growth, migration and signal transduction were significantly upregulated. Platelet-Rich Plasma can enhance the secretion function of MSC exosomes, significantly upregulate many proteins related to tissue repair, immune regulation and anti-infection, and enhance the repair effect of exosomes on skin injury. After replacing Foetal Bovine Serum with Platelet-Rich Plasma, Mesenchymal Stem Cells underwent metabolic reprogramming, the metabolism of amino acids and fatty acids and various signaling pathways were changed, the anabolic pathways of various proteins were enhanced. These results provide a theoretical and technical reference for optimizing the Mesenchymal Stem Cells culture system, improving the biological characteristics and clinical application effects of Mesenchymal Stem Cells.
IntroductionWhite Striping (WS) and Wooden Breast (WB) pectoral myopathies are relevant disorders for contemporary broiler production worldwide. Several studies aimed to elucidate the genetic components associated with the occurrence of these myopathies. However, epigenetic factors that trigger or differentiate these two conditions are still unclear. The aim of this study was to identify miRNAs differentially expressed (DE) between normal and WS and WB-affected broilers, and to verify the possible role of these miRNAs in metabolic pathways related to the manifestation of these pectoral myopathies in 28-day-old broilers.ResultsFive miRNAs were DE in the WS vs control (gga-miR-375, gga-miR-200b-3p, gga-miR-429-3p, gga-miR-1769-5p, gga-miR-200a-3p), 82 between WB vs control and 62 between WB vs WS. Several known miRNAs were associated with WB, such as gga-miR-155, gga-miR-146b, gga-miR-222, gga-miR-146-5p, gga-miR- 29, gga-miR-21-5p, gga-miR-133a-3p and gga-miR-133b. Most of them had not previously been associated with the development of this myopathy in broilers. We also have predicted 17 new miRNAs expressed in the broilers pectoral muscle. DE miRNA target gene ontology analysis enriched 6 common pathways for WS and WB compared to control: autophagy, insulin signaling, FoxO signaling, endocytosis, and metabolic pathways. The WS vs control contrast had two unique pathways, ERBB signaling and the mTOR signaling, while WB vs control had 14 unique pathways, with ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis and endoplasmic reticulum protein processing being the most significant.ConclusionsWe found miRNAs DE between normal broilers and those affected with breast myopathies at 28 days of age. Our results also provide novel evidence of the miRNAs role on the regulation of WS and in the differentiation of both WS and WB myopathies. Overall, our study provides insights into miRNA-mediated and pathways involved in the occurrence of WS and WB helping to better understand these chicken growth disorders in an early age. These findings can help developing new approaches to reduce these complex issues in poultry production possibly by adjustments in nutrition and management conditions. Moreover, the miRNAs and target genes associated with the initial stages of WS and WB development could be potential biomarkers to be used in selection to reduce the occurrence of these myopathies in broiler production.
BackgroundThe wild stocks of Pinctada maxima pearl oysters found off the coast of northern Australia are of critical importance for the sustainability of Australia's pearling industry. Locations inhabited by pearl oysters often have oil and gas reserves in the seafloor below and are therefore potentially subjected to seismic exploration surveys. The present study assessed the impact of a simulated commercial seismic survey on the transcriptome of pearl oysters. Animals were placed at seven distances (-1000, 0, 300, 500, 1000, 2000, and 6000 m) from the first of six operational seismic source sail lines. Vessel control groups were collected before the seismic survey started and exposed groups were collected after completion of six operational seismic sail lines (operated at varying distances over a four-day period). Samples from these groups were taken immediately and at 1, 3, and 6 months post-exposure. RNA-seq was used to identify candidate genes and pathways impacted by the seismic noise in pearl oyster mantle tissues. The quantified transcripts were compared using DESeq2 and pathway enrichment analysis was conducted using KEGG pathway, identifying differentially expressed genes and pathways associated with the seismic activity.ResultsThe study revealed the highest gene expression and pathway dysregulation after four days of exposure and a month post-exposure. However, this dysregulation diminished after three months, with only oysters at -1000 and 0 m displaying differential gene expression and pathway disruption six months post-exposure. Stress-induced responses were evident and impacted energy production, transcription, translation, and protein synthesis.ConclusionSeismic activity impacted the gene expression and pathways of pearl oysters at distances up to 2000 m from the source after four days of exposure, and at distances up to 1000 m from the source one-month post-exposure. At three- and six-months post-exposure, gene and pathway dysregulations were mostly observed in oysters located closest to the seismic source at 0 and - 1000 m. Overall, our results suggest that oysters successfully activated stress responses to mitigate damage and maintain cellular homeostasis and growth in response to seismic noise exposure.
BackgroundThymus mongolicus (family Lamiaceae) is a Thyme subshrub with strong aroma and remarkable environmental adaptability. Limited genomic information limits the use of this plant. ResultsChromosome-level 605.2 Mb genome of T. mongolicus was generated, with 96.28% anchored to 12 pseudochromosomes. The repetitive sequences were dominant, accounting for 70.98%, and 32,593 protein-coding genes were predicted. Synteny analysis revealed that Lamiaceae species generally underwent two rounds of whole genome duplication; moreover, species-specific genome duplication was identified. A recent LTR retrotransposon burst and tandem duplication might play important roles in the formation of the Thymus genome. Using comparative genomic analysis, phylogenetic tree of seven Lamiaceae species was constructed, which revealed that Thyme plants evolved recently in the family. Under the phylogenetic framework, we performed functional enrichment analysis of the genes on nodes that contained the most gene duplication events (> 50% support) and of relevant significant expanded gene families. These genes were highly associated with environmental adaptation and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. Combined transcriptome and metabolome analyses revealed that Peroxidases, Hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA shikimate/quinate hydroxycinnamoyl transferases, and 4-coumarate-CoA ligases genes were the essential regulators of the phenylpropanoid-flavonoid pathway. Their catalytic products (e.g., apigenin, naringenin chalcone, and several apigenin-related compounds) might be responsible for the environmental tolerance and aromatic properties of T. mongolicus. ConclusionThis study enhanced the understanding of the genomic evolution of T. mongolicus, enabling further exploration of its unique traits and applications, and contributed to the understanding of Lamiaceae genomics and evolutionary biology.
Klebsiella pneumoniae is a Gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae that is classified by the World Health Organisation (WHO) as a Priority One ESKAPE pathogen. South and Southeast Asian countries are regions where both healthcare associated infections (HAI) and community acquired infections (CAI) due to extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing and carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae (CRKp) are of concern. As K. pneumoniae can also exist as a harmless commensal, the spread of resistance genotypes requires epidemiological vigilance. However there has been no significant study of carriage isolates from healthy individuals, particularly in Southeast Asia, and specially Malaysia. Here we describe the genomic analysis of respiratory isolates of K. pneumoniae obtained from Orang Ulu and Orang Asli communities in Malaysian Borneo and Peninsular Malaysia respectively. The majority of isolates were K. pneumoniae species complex (KpSC) 1 K. pneumoniae (n = 53, 89.8%). Four Klebsiella variicola subsp. variicola (KpSC3) and two Klebsiella quasipneumoniae subsp. similipneumoniae (KpSC4) were also found. It was discovered that 30.2% (n = 16) of the KpSC1 isolates were ST23, 11.3% (n = 6) were of ST65, 7.5% (n = 4) were ST13, and 13.2% (n = 7) were ST86. Only eight of the KpSC1 isolates encoded ESBL, but importantly not carbapenemase. Thirteen of the KpSC1 isolates carried yersiniabactin, colibactin and aerobactin, all of which harboured the rmpADC locus and are therefore characterised as hypervirulent. Co-carriage of multiple strains was minimal. In conclusion, most isolates were KpSC1, ST23, one of the most common sequence types and previously found in cases of K. pneumoniae infection. A proportion were hypervirulent (hvKp) however antibiotic resistance was low.
Molluscan mitochondrial genomes are unusual because they show wide variation in size, radical genome rearrangements and frequently show high variation (> 10%) within species. As progress in understanding this variation has been limited, we used whole genome sequencing of a six-generation matriline of the terrestrial snail Cepaea nemoralis, as well as whole genome sequences from wild-collected C. nemoralis, the sister species C. hortensis, and multiple other snail species to explore the origins of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variation. The main finding is that a high rate of SNP heteroplasmy in somatic tissue was negatively correlated with mtDNA copy number in both Cepaea species. In individuals with under ten mtDNA copies per nuclear genome, more than 10% of all positions were heteroplasmic, with evidence for transmission of this heteroplasmy through the germline. Further analyses showed evidence for purifying selection acting on non-synonymous mutations, even at low frequency of the rare allele, especially in cytochrome oxidase subunit 1 and cytochrome b. The mtDNA of some individuals of Cepaea nemoralis contained a length heteroplasmy, including up to 12 direct repeat copies of tRNA-Val, with 24 copies in another snail, Candidula rugosiuscula, and repeats of tRNA-Thr in C. hortensis. These repeats likely arise due to error prone replication but are not correlated with mitochondrial copy number in C. nemoralis. Overall, the findings provide key insights into mechanisms of replication, mutation and evolution in molluscan mtDNA, and so will inform wider studies on the biology and evolution of mtDNA across animal phyla.
BackgroundChicken embryos emerge from their shell by the piercing movement of the hatching muscle. Although considered a key player during hatching, with activity that imposes a substantial metabolic demand, data are still limited. The study provides a bioenergetic and transcriptomic analyses during the pre-post-hatching period.MethodsWeight and morphology alongside content determination of creatine and glycogen were analysed. Transcriptome identified differentially expressed genes and enriched biological processes associated with hatching muscle development, catabolism, and energy provision. Using gene set enrichment, we followed the dynamics of gene-sets involved in energy pathways of oxidative phosphorylation, protein catabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and glycogen metabolism.ResultsResults show several significant findings: (A) Creatine plays a crucial role in the energy metabolism of the hatching muscle, with its concentration remaining stable while glycogen concentration is depleted at hatch and placement. (B) The hatching muscle has the capacity for de-novo creatine synthesis, as indicated by the expression of related genes (AGAT, GAMT). (C) Transcriptome provided insights into genes related to energy pathways under conditions of pre-hatch oxygen and post-hatch glucose limitations (oxidative phosphorylation: NDUF, MT-ND, SDH, UQCR, COX, MT-CO, ATP5, MT-ATP; glycolysis/gluconeogenesis: FBP,G6PC, PFKM; glycogen metabolism: PPP1, PYGL, GYG1). (D) The post-hatch upregulation of protein catabolic processes genes (PSMA, RNF, UBE, FBX), which align with the muscle's weight dynamics, indicates a functional shift from movement during hatching to lifting the head during feeding.ConclusionsThere is a dynamic metabolic switch in the hatching muscle during embryo-to-hatchling transition. When glycogen concentration depletes, energy supply is maintained by creatine and its de-novo synthesis. Understanding the hatching muscle's energy dynamics is crucial, for reducing hatching failures in endangered avian species, and in domesticated chickens.
Background Transposable elements (TEs) are mobile DNA sequences that propagate within genomes, occupying a significant portion of eukaryotic genomes and serving as a source of genetic variation and innovation. TEs can impact genome dynamics through their repetitive nature and mobility. Nematodes are incredibly versatile organisms, capable of thriving in a wide range of environments. The plant-parasitic nematodes are able to infect nearly all vascular plants, leading to significant crop losses and management expenses worldwide. It is worth noting that plant parasitism has evolved independently at least three times within this nematode group. Furthermore, the genome size of plant-parasitic nematodes can vary substantially, spanning from 41.5 Mbp to 235 Mbp. To investigate genome size variation and evolution in plant-parasitic nematodes, TE composition, diversity, and evolution were analysed in 26 plant-parasitic nematodes from 9 distinct genera in Clade IV.Results Interestingly, despite certain species lacking specific types of DNA transposons or retrotransposon superfamilies, they still exhibit a diverse range of TE content. Identification of species-specific TE repertoire in nematode genomes provides a deeper understanding of genome evolution in plant-parasitic nematodes. An intriguing observation is that plant-parasitic nematodes possess extensive DNA transposons and retrotransposon insertions, including recent sightings of LTR/Gypsy and LTR/Pao superfamilies. Among them, the Gypsy superfamilies were found to encode Aspartic proteases in the plant-parasitic nematodes.Conclusions The study of the transposable element (TE) composition in plant-parasitic nematodes has yielded insightful discoveries. The findings revealed that certain species exhibit lineage-specific variations in their TE makeup. Discovering the species-specific TE repertoire in nematode genomes is a crucial element in understanding the evolution of genomes in plant-parasitic nematodes. It allows us to gain a deeper insight into the intricate workings of these organisms and their genetic makeup. With this knowledge, we are gaining a fundamental piece in the puzzle of understanding the evolution of these parasites. Moreover, recent transpositions have led to the acquisition of new TE superfamilies, especially Gypsy and Pao retrotransposons, further expanding the diversity of TEs in these nematodes. Significantly, the widely distributed Gypsy superfamily possesses proteases that are exclusively associated with parasitism during nematode-host interactions. These discoveries provide a deeper understanding of the TE landscape within plant-parasitic nematodes.Conclusions The study of the transposable element (TE) composition in plant-parasitic nematodes has yielded insightful discoveries. The findings revealed that certain species exhibit lineage-specific variations in their TE makeup. Discovering the species-specific TE repertoire in nematode genomes is a crucial element in understanding the evolution of genomes in plant-parasitic nematodes. It allows us to gain a deeper insight into the intricate workings of these organisms and their genetic makeup. With this knowledge, we are gaining a fundamental piece in the puzzle of understanding the evolution of these parasites. Moreover, recent transpositions have led to the acquisition of new TE superfamilies, especially Gypsy and Pao retrotransposons, further expanding the diversity of TEs in these nematodes.
Background Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) is one of the most widely used gene expression analyses for validating RNA-seq data. This technique requires reference genes that are stable and highly expressed, at least across the different biological conditions present in the transcriptome. Reference and variable candidate gene selection is often neglected, leading to misinterpretation of the results. Results We developed a software named "Gene Selector for Validation" (GSV), which identifies the best reference and variable candidate genes for validation within a quantitative transcriptome. This tool also filters the candidate genes concerning the RT-qPCR assay detection limit. GSV was compared with other software using synthetic datasets and performed better, removing stable low-expression genes from the reference candidate list and creating the variable-expression validation list. GSV software was used on a real case, an Aedes aegypti transcriptome. The top GSV reference candidate genes were selected for RT-qPCR analysis, confirming that eiF1A and eiF3j were the most stable genes tested. The tool also confirmed that traditional mosquito reference genes were less stable in the analyzed samples, highlighting the possibility of inappropriate choices. A meta-transcriptome dataset with more than ninety thousand genes was also processed successfully. Conclusion The GSV tool is a time and cost-effective tool that can be used to select reference and validation candidate genes from the biological conditions present in transcriptomic data.
BackgroundThe CBM13 family comprises carbohydrate-binding modules that occur mainly in enzymes and in several ricin-B lectins. The ricin-B lectin domain resembles the CBM13 module to a large extent. Historically, ricin-B lectins and CBM13 proteins were considered completely distinct, despite their structural and functional similarities.ResultsIn this data mining study, we investigate structural and functional similarities of these intertwined protein groups. Because of the high structural and functional similarities, and differences in nomenclature usage in several databases, confusion can arise. First, we demonstrate how public protein databases use different nomenclature systems to describe CBM13 modules and putative ricin-B lectin domains. We suggest the introduction of a novel CBM13 domain identifier, as well as the extension of CAZy cross-references in UniProt to guard the distinction between CAZy and non-CAZy entries in public databases. Since similar problems may occur with other lectin families and CBM families, we suggest the introduction of novel CBM InterPro domain identifiers to all existing CBM families. Second, we investigated phylogenetic, nomenclatural and structural similarities between putative ricin-B lectin domains and CBM13 modules, making use of sequence similarity networks. We concluded that the ricin-B/CBM13 superfamily may be larger than initially thought and that several putative ricin-B lectin domains may display CAZyme functionalities, although biochemical proof remains to be delivered.ConclusionsRicin-B lectin domains and CBM13 modules are associated groups of proteins whose database semantics are currently biased towards ricin-B lectins. Revision of the CAZy cross-reference in UniProt and introduction of a dedicated CBM13 domain identifier in InterPro may resolve this issue. In addition, our analyses show that several proteins with putative ricin-B lectin domains show very strong structural similarity to CBM13 modules. Therefore ricin-B lectin domains and CBM13 modules could be considered distant members of a larger ricin-B/CBM13 superfamily.
BackgroundHeat stress has deleterious effects on physiological and performance traits in livestock. Within this context, using tropically adapted cattle breeds in pure herds or terminal crossbreeding schemes to explore heterosis is attractive for increasing animal production in warmer climate regions. This study aimed to identify biological processes, pathways, and potential biomarkers related to thermotolerance in Caracu, a tropically adapted beef cattle breed, by proteomic analysis of blood plasma. To achieve this goal, 61 bulls had their thermotolerance evaluated through a heat tolerance index. A subset of 14 extreme animals, including the seven most thermotolerant (HIGH group) and the seven least thermotolerant (LOW group), had their blood plasma samples used for proteomic analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The differentially regulated proteins detected between HIGH and LOW groups were used to perform functional enrichment analysis and a protein-protein interaction network analysis.ResultsA total of 217 proteins were detected only in the HIGH thermotolerant group and 51 only in the LOW thermotolerant group. In addition, 81 and 87 proteins had significantly higher and lower abundancies in the HIGH group, respectively. Regarding proteins with the highest absolute log-fold change values, we highlighted those encoded by DUSP5, IGFALS, ROCK2, RTN4, IRAG1, and NNT genes based on their functions. The functional enrichment analysis detected several biological processes, molecular functions, and pathways related to cellular responses to stress, immune system, complement system, and hemostasis in both HIGH and LOW groups, in addition to terms and pathways related to lipids and calcium only in the HIGH group. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network revealed as important nodes many proteins with roles in response to stress, hemostasis, immune system, inflammation, and homeostasis. Additionally, proteins with high absolute log-fold change values and proteins detected as essential nodes by PPI analysis highlighted herein are potential biomarkers for thermotolerance, such as ADRA1A, APOA1, APOB, APOC3, C4BPA, CAT, CFB, CFH, CLU, CXADR, DNAJB1, DNAJC13, DUSP5, FGA, FGB, FGG, HBA, HBB, HP, HSPD1, IGFALS, IRAG1, KNG1, NNT, OSGIN1, PROC, PROS1, ROCK2, RTN4, RYR1, TGFB2, VLDLR, VTN, and VWF.ConclusionsIdentifying potential biomarkers, molecular mechanisms and pathways that act in response to heat stress in tropically adapted beef cattle contributes to developing strategies to improve performance and welfare traits in livestock under tropical climates.
Feather pecking (FP) is a repetitive behaviour in chickens, influenced by genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors, similar to behaviours seen in human developmental disorders (e.g., hyperactivity, autism). This study examines genetic and neuro-epigenetic factors in the thalamus of chickens from lines selected for seven generations for high or low FP behaviour (HFP or LFP). We integrate data on Differentially Methylated Regions (DMRs), Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), and Copy Number Variations (CNVs) in this controlled artificial selection process. Significant differences in behaviour, immunology, and neurology have been reported in these lines. We identified 710 SNPs in these lines that indicate new potentially important genes for FP such as TMPRSS6 (implicated in autism), and SST and ARNT2 (somatostatin function). CNV were the omic level most affected during selection. The largest CNVs found were in RIC3 (gain in HFP) and SH3RF2 (gain in LFP) genes, linked to nicotinic acetylcholine receptor regulation and human oncogenesis, respectively. Our study also suggests that promoters and introns are hotspots for CpG depletion. The overlapping of the omic levels investigated here with data from a public FP Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) database revealed novel candidate genes for understanding repetitive behaviours, such as RTKN2, associated with Alzheimer's disease in humans. This study suggests CNVs as a crucial initial step for genomic diversification, potentially more impactful than SNPs.
Background Quorum sensing (QS) is a sophisticated cell-to-cell signalling mechanism that allows the coordination of important processes in microbial populations. The AI-1 and AI-2 autoinducer systems are among the best characterized bacterial QS systems at the genetic level. Results In this study, we present data derived from in silico screening of QS proteins from bacterial genomes available in public databases. Sequence analyses allowed identifying candidate sequences of known QS systems that were used to build phylogenetic trees. Eight categories were established according to the number of genes from the two major QS systems present in each genome, revealing a correlation with specific taxa, lifestyles or metabolic traits. Many species had incomplete QS systems, encoding the receptor protein but not the biosynthesis of the quorum sensing molecule (QSMs). Reconstruction of the evolutionary history of the LuxR family and prediction of the 3D structure of the ancestral protein suggested their monomeric configuration in the absence of the signal molecule and the presence of a cavity for its binding. Conclusions Here we correlate the taxonomic affiliation and lifestyle of bacteria from different genera with the QS systems encoded in their genomes. Moreover, we present the first ancestral reconstruction of the LuxR QS receptors, providing further insight in their evolutionary history.
BackgroundBisphenol S (BPS) is the main substitute for bisphenol A (BPA), a well-known plasticiser and endocrine disruptor. BPS disrupts ovarian function in several species. Moreover, a few studies have reported that the effects of BPS might be modulated by the metabolic status, and none have characterised the granulosa cell (GC) proteome after chronic BPS exposure.ObjectivesThis study aimed to decipher the mechanisms of action of chronic BPS exposure on the proteome of ewe GCs while considering the interaction between a deliberate contrasted metabolism and reproductive function.MethodsForty ewes were split into two groups with contrasted diets: restricted (R, n = 20) and well-fed (WF, n = 20). The R and WF ewes were subdivided according to the dose of BPS administered through the diet (0-50 mu g/kg/day), forming four groups: R0, R50, WF0 and WF50. After 3-month BPS daily exposure, GCs were recovered during the pre-ovulatory stage and proteins were analysed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry.ResultsChronic exposure to BPS affected the GC proteome differently according to the ewe metabolic status. Fifty-nine out of 958 quantified proteins were differentially abundant between groups and are mainly involved in carbohydrate and lipid pathways. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) identified four clusters of 34, 6, 5 and 14 proteins according to the BPS exposure and diet interaction. Pairwise comparisons between groups also revealed a strong effect of BPS exposure and diet interaction. Functional analysis of DAPs highlighted that BPS upregulated beta-glucuronidase (GUSB; p = 0.002), a protein especially able to deconjugate bisphenol glucuronides (BP-g). Moreover, among unexposed ewes, GUSB was detected only in well-fed ewes.DiscussionConjugation of glucuronides inhibits the oestrogenic activity of bisphenols. Upregulation of GUSB in ewes dosed with BPS would prolong the oestrogenic effects of BPS by deconjugating BPS-g into free BPS. In addition, literature has reported an up-regulation of GUSB in people suffering from obesity. Therefore, people suffering from obesity could be subjected to prolonged and aggravated exposure to BPS. These data highlighted the deleterious effects of BPS and its interaction with metabolic status.
Background Heat stress (HS) poses significant threats to the sustainability of livestock production. Genetically improving heat tolerance could enhance animal welfare and minimize production losses during HS events. Measuring phenotypic indicators of HS response and understanding their genetic background are crucial steps to optimize breeding schemes for improved climatic resilience. The identification of genomic regions and candidate genes influencing the traits of interest, including variants with pleiotropic effects, enables the refinement of genotyping panels used to perform genomic prediction of breeding values and contributes to unraveling the biological mechanisms influencing heat stress response. Therefore, the main objectives of this study were to identify genomic regions, candidate genes, and potential pleiotropic variants significantly associated with indicators of HS response in lactating sows using imputed whole-genome sequence (WGS) data. Phenotypic records for 18 traits and genomic information from 1,645 lactating sows were available for the study. The genotypes from the PorcineSNP50K panel containing 50,703 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were imputed to WGS and after quality control, 1,622 animals and 7,065,922 SNPs were included in the analyses.Results A total of 1,388 unique SNPs located on sixteen chromosomes were found to be associated with 11 traits. Twenty gene ontology terms and 11 biological pathways were shown to be associated with variability in ear skin temperature, shoulder skin temperature, rump skin temperature, tail skin temperature, respiration rate, panting score, vaginal temperature automatically measured every 10 min, vaginal temperature measured at 0800 h, hair density score, body condition score, and ear area. Seven, five, six, two, seven, 15, and 14 genes with potential pleiotropic effects were identified for indicators of skin temperature, vaginal temperature, animal temperature, respiration rate, thermoregulatory traits, anatomical traits, and all traits, respectively.Conclusions Physiological and anatomical indicators of HS response in lactating sows are heritable but highly polygenic. The candidate genes found are associated with important gene ontology terms and biological pathways related to heat shock protein activities, immune response, and cellular oxidative stress. Many of the candidate genes with pleiotropic effects are involved in catalytic activities to reduce cell damage from oxidative stress and cellular mechanisms related to immune response.
Background Enzymatic degradation mediated by beta-lactamases constitutes one of the primary mechanisms of resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics in gram-negative bacteria. This enzyme family comprises four molecular classes, categorized into serine beta-lactamases (Classes A, C, and D) and zinc-dependent metallo-beta-lactamases (Class B). Gram-negative bacteria producing beta-lactamase are of significant concern, particularly due to their prevalence in nosocomial infections. A comprehensive understanding of the evolution and dissemination of this enzyme family is essential for effective control of these pathogens. In this study, we conducted the prospecting, phylogenetic analysis, and in silico analysis of beta-lactamases and homologous proteins identified in 1827 bacterial genomes with phenotypic data on beta-lactam resistance. These genomes were distributed among Klebsiella pneumoniae (45%), Acinetobacter baumannii (31%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (14%), Escherichia coli (6%), and Enterobacter spp. (4%). Using an HMM profile and searching for conserved domains, we mined 2514, 8733, 5424, and 2957 proteins for molecular classes A, B, C, and D, respectively. This set of proteins encompasses canonical subfamilies of beta-lactamases as well as hypothetical proteins and other functional groups. Canonical beta-lactamases were found to be phylogenetically distant from hypothetical proteins, which, in turn, are closer to other representatives of the penicillin-binding-protein (PBP-like) and metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL) families. The catalytic amino acid residues characteristic of beta-lactamases were identified from the sequence alignment and revealed that motifs are less conserved in homologous groups than in beta-lactamases. After comparing the frequency of protein groups in genomes of resistant strains with those of sensitive ones applying Fisher's exact test and relative risk, it was observed that some groups of homologous proteins to classes B and C are more common in the genomes of resistant strains, particularly to carbapenems. We identified the beta-lactamase-like domain widely distributed in gram-negative species of the ESKAPEE group, which highlights its importance in the context of beta-lactam resistance. Some hypothetical homologous proteins have been shown to potentially possess promiscuous activity against beta-lactam antibiotics, however, they do not appear to expressly determine the resistance phenotype. The selective pressure due to the widespread use of antibiotics may favor the optimization of these functions for specialized resistance enzymes.Background Enzymatic degradation mediated by beta-lactamases constitutes one of the primary mechanisms of resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics in gram-negative bacteria. This enzyme family comprises four molecular classes, categorized into serine beta-lactamases (Classes A, C, and D) and zinc-dependent metallo-beta-lactamases (Class B). Gram-negative bacteria producing beta-lactamase are of significant concern, particularly due to their prevalence in nosocomial infections. A comprehensive understanding of the evolution and dissemination of this enzyme family is essential for effective control of these pathogens. In this study, we conducted the prospecting, phylogenetic analysis, and in silico analysis of beta-lactamases and homologous proteins identified in 1827 bacterial genomes with phenotypic data on beta-lactam resistance.
Gene expression through RT-qPCR can be performed by the relative quantification method, which requires the expression normalization through reference genes. Therefore, it is essential to validate, experimentally, the candidate reference genes. Thus, although there are several studies that are performed to identify the most stable reference genes, most them validate genes for very specific conditions, not exploring the whole potential of the research since not all possible combinations of treatments and/or conditions of the study are explored. For this reason, new experiments must be conducted by researchers that have interest in analyzing gene expression of treatments and/or conditions present, but not explored, in these studies. Here, we present the RGeasy tool, which aims to facilitate the selection of reference genes, allowing the user to choose genes for a greater number of combinations of treatments/conditions, compared to the ones present in the original articles, through just a few clicks. RGeasy was validated with RT-qPCR data from gene expression studies performed in two coffee species, Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora, and it can be used for any animal, plant or microorganism species. In addition to displaying a rank of the most stable reference genes for each condition or treatment, the user also has access to the primer pairs for the selected reference genes.
Background Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor, the etiological agent responsible for the last cholera pandemic, has become a well-established model organism for which some genetic tools are available. While CRISPRi technology has been applied to V. cholerae, improvements were necessary to upscale it and enable pooled screening by high-throughput sequencing in this bacterium. Results In this study, we present a genome-wide CRISPR-dCas9 screen specifically optimized for the N16961 El Tor model strain of V. cholerae. This approach is characterized by a tight control of dCas9 expression and activity, as well as a streamlined experimental setup. Our library allows the depletion of 3,674 (98.9%) annotated genes from the V. cholerae genome. To confirm its effectiveness, we screened for genes that are essential during exponential growth in rich medium and identified 369 genes for which guides were significantly depleted from the library (log2FC < -2). Remarkably, 82% of these genes had previously been described as hypothetical essential genes in V. cholerae or in a closely related bacterium, V. natriegens. Conclusion We thus validated the robustness and accuracy of our CRISPRi-based approach for assessing gene fitness in a given condition. Our findings highlight the efficacy of the developed CRISPRi platform as a powerful tool for high-throughput functional genomics studies of V. cholerae.
Microbiome influences multiple human systems, but its effects on gene methylation is unknown. We investigated the relations between gene methylation in blood and the abundance of common gut bacteria profiled by 16s rRNA gene sequencing in two population-based Dutch cohorts: LifeLines-Deep (LLD, n = 616, discovery) and the Netherlands Twin Register (NTR, n = 296, replication). In LLD, we also explored microbial pathways using data generated by shotgun metagenomic sequencing (n = 683). Methylation in both cohorts was profiled in blood samples using the Illumina 450K array. Discovery and replication analysis identified two independent CpGs associated with the genus Eggerthella: cg16586104 (Pmeta-analysis = 3.21 x 10-11) and cg12234533 (Pmeta-analysis = 4.29 x 10-10). We also show that microbiome can mediate the effect of environmental factors on host gene methylation. In this first association study linking epigenome to microbiome, we found and replicated the associations of two CpGs to the abundance of genus Eggerthella and identified microbiome as a mediator of the exposome. These associations are observational and suggest further investigation in larger and longitudinal set-ups.
Mastication trait of citrus significantly influences the fruit's overall quality and consumer preference. The accumulation of cellulose in fruits significantly impacts the mastication trait of citrus fruits, and the glycoside hydrolase 9 (GH9) family plays a crucial role in cellulose metabolism. In this study, we successfully identified 32 GH9 genes from the Citrus sinensis genome and subsequently conducted detailed bioinformatics analyses of the GH9 family. Additionally, we profiled the spatiotemporal expression patterns of CsGH9 genes across four distinct fruit tissue types and six crucial developmental stages of citrus fruits, leveraging transcriptome data. Parallel to this, we undertook a comparative analysis of transcriptome profiles and cellulose content among diverse fruit tissues spanning six developmental stages. Furthermore, to identify the pivotal genes involved in cellulose metabolism within the GH9 family during fruit maturity, we employed correlation analysis between cellulose content and gene expression in varying tissues across diverse citrus varieties. This analysis highlighted key genes such as CsGH9A2/6 and CsGH9B12/13/14/22. Collectively, this study provides an in-depth analysis of the GH9 gene family in citrus and offers novel molecular insights into the underlying mechanisms governing the mastication trait formation in citrus fruits.
BackgroundGram-negative bacteria are the main bacterial pathogens infecting Chinese giant salamanders (Andrias davidianus; CGS) in captivity and the wild, causing substantial economic losses in the CGS industry. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying pathogenesis following infection remain unclear.ResultsSpleen-derived macrophages from healthy CGS were isolated, cultured, and identified using density gradient centrifugation and immunofluorescence. A macrophage transcriptome database was established 0, 6, and 12 h post lipopolysaccharide stimulation using RNA-sequencing. In the final database 76,743 unigenes and 4,698 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were functionally annotated. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment results showed that DEGs were concentrated in toll-like receptor-nuclear factor kappa B-related immune pathways. Ten DEGs were validated 12 h after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. Although the common LPS recognition receptor toll-like receptor 4 was not activated and the key adaptor protein MyD88 showed no significant response, we observed significant up-regulation of the following adaptors: toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon-beta, tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6, and transforming growth factor-beta activated kinase 1, which are located downstream of the non-classical MyD88 pathway.ConclusionsIn contrast to that in other species, macrophage activation in CGS could depend on the non-classical MyD88 pathway in response to bacterial infection. Our study provides insights into the molecular mechanisms regulating CGS antibacterial responses, with implications for disease prevention and understanding immune evolution in amphibians.
Background The postharvest rot of kiwifruit is one of the most devastating diseases affecting kiwifruit quality worldwide. However, the genomic basis and pathogenicity mechanisms of kiwifruit rot pathogens are lacking. Here we report the first whole genome sequence of Pestalotiopsis microspora, one of the main pathogens causing postharvest kiwifruit rot in China. The genome of strain KFRD-2 was sequenced, de novo assembled, and analyzed. Results The genome of KFRD-2 was estimated to be approximately 50.31 Mb in size, with an overall GC content of 50.25%. Among 14,711 predicted genes, 14,423 (98.04%) exhibited significant matches to genes in the NCBI nr database. A phylogenetic analysis of 26 known pathogenic fungi, including P. microspora KFRD-2, based on conserved orthologous genes, revealed that KFRD-2's closest evolutionary relationships were to Neopestalotiopsis spp. Among KFRD-2's coding genes, 870 putative CAZy genes spanned six classes of CAZys, which play roles in degrading plant cell walls. Out of the 25 other plant pathogenic fungi, P. microspora possessed a greater number of CAZy genes than 22 and was especially enriched in GH and AA genes. A total of 845 transcription factors and 86 secondary metabolism gene clusters were predicted, representing various types. Furthermore, 28 effectors and 109 virulence-enhanced factors were identified using the PHI (pathogen host-interacting) database. Conclusion This complete genome sequence analysis of the kiwifruit postharvest rot pathogen P. microspora enriches our understanding its disease pathogenesis and virulence. This study establishes a theoretical foundation for future investigations into the pathogenic mechanisms of P. microspora and the development of enhanced strategies for the efficient management of kiwifruit postharvest rots.
BackgroundThe subcellular localization of mRNA plays a crucial role in gene expression regulation and various cellular processes. However, existing wet lab techniques like RNA-FISH are usually time-consuming, labor-intensive, and limited to specific tissue types. Researchers have developed several computational methods to predict mRNA subcellular localization to address this. These methods face the problem of class imbalance in multi-label classification, causing models to favor majority classes and overlook minority classes during training. Additionally, traditional feature extraction methods have high computational costs, incomplete features, and may lead to the loss of critical information. On the other hand, deep learning methods face challenges related to hardware performance and training time when handling complex sequences. They may suffer from the curse of dimensionality and overfitting problems. Therefore, there is an urgent need for more efficient and accurate prediction models.ResultsTo address these issues, we propose a multi-label classifier, EDCLoc, for predicting mRNA subcellular localization. EDCLoc reduces training pressure through a stepwise pooling strategy and applies grouped convolution blocks of varying sizes at different levels, combined with residual connections, to achieve efficient feature extraction and gradient propagation. The model employs global max pooling at the end to further reduce feature dimensions and highlight key features. To tackle class imbalance, we improved the focal loss function to enhance the model's focus on minority classes. Evaluation results show that EDCLoc outperforms existing methods in most subcellular regions. Additionally, the position weight matrix extracted by multi-scale CNN filters can match known RNA-binding protein motifs, demonstrating EDCLoc's effectiveness in capturing key sequence features.ConclusionsEDCLoc outperforms existing prediction tools in most subcellular regions and effectively mitigates class imbalance issues in multi-label classification. These advantages make EDCLoc a reliable choice for multi-label mRNA subcellular localization. The dataset and source code used in this study are available at https://github.com/DellCode233/EDCLoc.
The Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, is a global invasive species, notorious for its role in transmitting dangerous human arboviruses such as dengue and Chikungunya. Although hematophagous behavior is repulsive, it is an effective strategy for mosquitoes like Aedes albopictus to transmit viruses, posing a significant risk to human health. However, the fragmented nature of the Ae. albopictus genome assembly has been a significant challenge, hindering in-depth biological and genetic studies of this mosquito. In this research, we have harnessed a variety of technologies and implemented a novel strategy to create a significantly improved genome assembly for Ae. albopictus, designated as AealbF3. This assembly boasts a completeness rate of up to 98.1%, and the duplication rate has been minimized to 1.2%. Furthermore, the fragmented contigs or scaffolds of AealbF3 have been organized into three distinct chromosomes, an arrangement corroborated through syntenic plot analysis, which compared the genetic structure of Ae. albopictus with that of Ae. aegypti. Additionally, the study has revealed a phylogenetic relationship suggesting that the PGANT3 gene is implicated in the hematophagous behavior of Ae. albopictus. This involvement was preliminarily substantiated through RNA interference (RNAi) techniques and behavioral experiment. In summary, the AealbF3 genome assembly will facilitate new biological insights and intervention strategies for combating this formidable vector of disease. The innovative assembly process employed in this study could also serve as a valuable template for the assembly of genomes in other insects characterized by high levels of heterozygosity.
Pheromone communication is a key mechanism by which the reproductive division of labor is maintained within insect communities. Understanding how pheromones evolved to regulate social behavior requires knowledge of the molecular regulation of their production. However, even in cases where pheromones were identified, our understanding of their biosynthesis and molecular regulation remains limited. Bumble bees provide a unique system to explore pheromone biosynthesis since workers produce ester sterility signals in their Dufour's gland that differ from gyne-specific esters and are not produced by queens. These esters are hypothesized to be produced in the exocrine gland where they are stored, and indeed queens, gynes and workers differ significantly in the expression of Dufour's gland genes coding to enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of esters. However, a previous transcriptome analysis revealed no gene expression differences in the Dufour's gland of workers despite differences in both ester production and ovarian activation, suggesting that ester production may be regulated lower down. Proteomics of the Dufour's gland of queens, gynes, and workers recovered over 2400 proteins and broadly matched the previous RNAseq data. However, more than 100 differentially expressed proteins were found between the worker groups, including key enzymes in fatty acid biosynthesis, indicating that the regulation of reproductive signal biosynthesis in workers is done post-transcription. Overall, our data provide evidence that pheromone biosynthesis in the Dufour's gland is caste specific, that gynes and workers are likely using different enzymes to make their respective wax esters, and that the regulation on pheromone production in queens, gynes and workers is likely done at different regulatory levels, with workers signals being subjected to regulation at the protein level.
Transcriptome-wide survey divulged a total of 181 ABC transporters in G. glabra which were phylogenetically classified into six subfamilies. Protein-Protein interactions revealed nine putative GgABCBs (-B6, -B14, -B15, -B25, -B26, -B31, -B40, -B42 &-B44) corresponding to five AtABCs orthologs (-B1, -B4, -B11, -B19, &-B21). Significant transcript accumulation of ABCB6 (31.8 folds), -B14 (147.5 folds), -B15 (17 folds), -B25 (19.7 folds), -B26 (18.31 folds), -B31 (61.89 folds), -B40 (1273 folds) and -B42 (51 folds) was observed under the influence of auxin. Auxin transport-specific inhibitor, N-1-naphthylphthalamic acid, showed its effectiveness only at higher (10 mu M) concentration where it down regulated the expression of ABCBs, PINs (PIN FORMED) and TWD1 (TWISTED DWARF 1) genes in shoot tissues, while their expression was seen to enhance in the root tissues. Further, qRT-PCR analysis under various growth conditions (in-vitro, field and growth chamber), and subjected to abiotic stresses revealed differential expression implicating role of ABCBs in stress management. Seven of the nine genes were shown to be involved in the stress physiology of the plant. GgABCB6, 15, 25 and ABCB31 were induced in multiple stresses, while GgABCB26, 40 & 42 were exclusively triggered under drought stress. No study pertaining to the ABC transporters from G. glabra is available till date. The present investigation will give an insight to auxin transportation which has been found to be associated with plant growth architecture; the knowledge will help to understand the association between auxin transportation and plant responses under the influence of various conditions.
BackgroundAlthough metabarcoding and metagenomic approaches have generated large datasets on worldwide phytoplankton species diversity, the intraspecific genetic diversity underlying the genetic adaptation of marine phytoplankton to specific environmental niches remains largely unexplored. This is mainly due to the lack of biological resources and tools for monitoring the dynamics of this diversity in space and time.ResultsTo gain insight into population diversity, a novel method based on INDEL markers was developed on Bathycoccus prasinos (Mamiellophyceae), an abundant and cosmopolitan species with strong seasonal patterns. Long read sequencing was first used to characterize structural variants among the genomes of six B. prasinos strains sampled from geographically distinct regions in the world ocean. Markers derived from identified insertions/deletions were validated by PCR then used to genotype 55 B. prasinos strains isolated during the winter bloom 2018-2019 in the bay of Banyuls-sur-Mer (Mediterranean Sea, France). This led to their classification into eight multi-loci genotypes and the sequencing of strains representative of local diversity, further improving the available genetic diversity of B. prasinos. Finally, selected markers were directly tracked on environmental DNA sampled during 3 successive blooms from 2018 to 2021, showcasing a fast and cost-effective approach to follow local population dynamics.ConclusionsThis method, which involves (i) pre-identifying the genetic diversity of B. prasinos in environmental samples by PCR, (ii) isolating cells from selected environmental samples and (iii) identifying genotypes representative of B. prasinos diversity for sequencing, can be used to comprehensively describe the diversity and population dynamics not only in B. prasinos but also potentially in other generalist phytoplankton species.
BackgroundIndigenous buffaloes, as the important livestock species contributing to economy of the country, are the lifeline of livelihood in Nepal. They are distributed across diverse geographical regions of the country and have adapted to various feeding, breeding, and management conditions. The larger group of these native buffalo breeds are present in narrow and stiff hilly terrains. Their dispersal indicates a possible environmental adaptation mechanism, which is crucial for the conservation of these breeds.ResultsWe utilized whole-genome sequencing (WGS) to investigate the genetic diversity, population structure, and selection signatures of Nepalese indigenous buffaloes. We compared 66 whole-genome sequences with 118 publicly available sequences from six river and five swamp buffalo breeds. Genomic diversity parameters indicated genetic variability level in the Nepalese buffaloes comparable to those of Indian breeds, and population genetic structure revealed distinct geography-mediated genetic differentiation among these breeds. We used locus-specific branch length analysis (LSBL) for genome-wide scan, which revealed a list of potentially selected genes in Lime and Parkote breeds that inhabit the hilly region. A gene ontology (GO) analysis discovered that many GO terms were associated with cardiac function regulation. Furthermore, complementary analyses of local selection signatures, tissue expression profiles, and haplotype differences identified candidate genes, including KCNE1, CSF1R, and PDGFRB, related to the regulation of cardiac and pulmonary functions.ConclusionsThis study is a comprehensive WGS-based genetic analysis of the native Nepalese buffalo breeds. Our study suggested that the Nepalese "hilly" buffaloes, especially the Lime and Parkote breeds, have undergone some characteristic genetic changes and evolved increased cardiac and pulmonary function for their adaptation to the steep hilly terrains of the country.
Circular RNAs (circRNA) are a class of non-coding RNA, forming a single-stranded covalently closed loop structure generated via back-splicing. Advancements in sequencing methods and technologies in conjunction with algorithmic developments of bioinformatics tools have enabled researchers to characterise the origin and function of circRNAs, with practical applications as a biomarker of diseases becoming increasingly relevant. Computational methods developed for circRNA analysis are predicated on detecting the chimeric back-splice junction of circRNAs whilst mitigating false-positive sequencing artefacts. In this review, we discuss in detail the computational strategies developed for circRNA identification, highlighting a selection of tool strengths, weaknesses and assumptions. In addition to circRNA identification tools, we describe methods for characterising the role of circRNAs within the competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network, their interactions with RNA-binding proteins, and publicly available databases for rich circRNA annotation.
BackgroundGoat milk is gaining popularity as a superior alternative to bovine milk due to its closer resemblance to human milk. Understanding the molecular processes underlying lactation is crucial for improving milk quality and production in goats. However, the genetic mechanisms governing lactation in goats, particularly in indigenous breeds like the Jakhrana, remain largely unexplored.ResultsIn this study, we performed a comprehensive transcriptomic analysis of Jakhrana goat mammary glands during early and late lactation stages. We isolated milk somatic cells and conducted RNA sequencing, followed by transcript quantification and mapping against the ARS1.2 Capra hircus reference assembly. Our analysis identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and commonly expressed genes (CEGs) across the lactation phases. Early lactation showed enrichment of genes encoding antimicrobial peptides and lubrication proteins, while late lactation exhibited heightened expression of genes encoding major milk proteins. Additionally, DEG analysis revealed upregulation of pivotal genes, such as the ABC transporter gene MRP4, implicated in modulating milk composition and quality.ConclusionOur findings provide insights into the genetic mechanisms underlying lactation dynamics in the Jakhrana goat. Understanding these mechanisms could help in improving milk production and quality in goats, benefiting both the dairy industry and consumers.
Background Sugarcane (Saccharum spp.) holds exceptional global significance as a vital crop, serving as a primary source of sucrose, bioenergy, and various by-products. The optimization of sugarcane breeding by fine-tuning essential traits has become crucial for enhancing crop productivity and stress resilience. Leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLK) genes present promising targets for this purpose, as they are involved in various aspects of plant development and defense processes. Results Here, we present a detailed overview of phylogeny and expression of 288 (495 alleles) and 312 (1365 alleles) LRR-RLK genes from two founding Saccharum species, respectively. Phylogenetic analysis categorized these genes into 15 subfamilies, revealing considerable expansion or reduction in certain LRR-type subfamilies. Compared to other plant species, both Saccharum species had more significant LRR-RLK genes. Examination of cis-acting elements demonstrated that SsLRR-RLK and SoLRR-RLK genes exhibited no significant difference in the types of elements included, primarily involved in four physiological processes. This suggests a broad conservation of LRR-RLK gene function during Saccharum evolution. Synteny analysis indicated that all LRR-RLK genes in both Saccharum species underwent gene duplication, primarily through whole-genome duplication (WGD) or segmental duplication. We identified 28 LRR-RLK genes exhibiting novel expression patterns in response to different tissues, gradient development leaves, and circadian rhythm in the two Saccharum species. Additionally, SoLRR-RLK104, SoLRR-RLK7, SoLRR-RLK113, and SsLRR-RLK134 were identified as candidate genes for sugarcane disease defense response regulators through transcriptome data analysis of two disease stresses. This suggests LRR-RLK genes of sugarcane involvement in regulating various biological processes, including leaf development, plant morphology, photosynthesis, maintenance of circadian rhythm stability, and defense against sugarcane diseases. Conclusions This investigation into gene duplication, functional conservation, and divergence of LRR-RLK genes in two founding Saccharum species lays the groundwork for a comprehensive genomic analysis of the entire LRR-RLK gene family in Saccharum. The results reveal LRR-RLK gene played a critical role in Saccharum adaptation to diverse conditions, offering valuable insights for targeted breeding and precise phenotypic adjustments.
The common dolphin (Delphinus delphis) is widely distributed worldwide and well adapted to various habitats. Animal genomes store clues about their pasts, and can reveal the genes underlying their evolutionary success. Here, we report the first high-quality chromosome-level genome of D. delphis. The assembled genome size was 2.56 Gb with a contig N50 of 63.85 Mb. Phylogenetically, D. delphis was close to Tursiops truncatus and T. aduncus. The genome of D. delphis exhibited 428 expanded and 1,885 contracted gene families, and 120 genes were identified as positively selected. The expansion of the HSP70 gene family suggested that D. delphis has a powerful system for buffering stress, which might be associated with its broad adaptability, longevity, and detoxification capacity. The expanded IFN-alpha and IFN-omega gene families, as well as the positively selected genes encoding tripartite motif-containing protein 25, peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase NIMA-interacting 1, and p38 MAP kinase, were all involved in pathways for antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and antineoplastic mechanisms. The genome data also revealed dramatic fluctuations in the effective population size during the Pleistocene. Overall, the high-quality genome assembly and annotation represent significant molecular resources for ecological and evolutionary studies of Delphinus and help support their sustainable treatment and conservation.
Background Telomere length is a critical metric linked to aging, health, and disease. Currently, the exploration of target proteins related to telomere length is usually limited to the context of aging and specific diseases, which limits the discovery of more relevant drug targets. This study integrated large-scale plasma cis-pQTLs data and telomere length GWAS datasets. We used Mendelian randomization(MR) to identify drug target proteins for telomere length, providing essential clues for future precision therapy and targeted drug development. Methods Using plasma cis-pQTLs data from a previous GWAS study (3,606 Pqtls associated with 2,656 proteins) and a GWAS dataset of telomere length (sample size: 472,174; GWAS ID: ieu-b-4879) from UK Biobank, using MR, external validation, and reverse causality testing, we identified essential drug target proteins for telomere length. We also performed co-localization, Phenome-wide association studies and enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction network construction, search for existing intervening drugs, and potential drug/compound prediction for these critical targets to strengthen and expand our findings. Results After Bonferron correction (p < 0.05/734), RPN1 (OR: 0.96; 95%CI: (0.95, 0.97)), GDI2 (OR: 0.94; 95%CI: (0.92, 0.96)), NT5C (OR: 0.97; 95%CI: (0.95, 0.98)) had a significant negative causal association with telomere length; TYRO3 (OR: 1.11; 95%CI: (1.09, 1.15)) had a significant positive causal association with telomere length. GDI2 shared the same genetic variants with telomere length (coloc.abf-PPH 4 > 0.8). Conclusion Genetically determined plasma RPN1, GDI2, NT5C, and TYRO3 have significant causal effects on telomere length and can potentially be drug targets. Further exploration of the role and mechanism of these proteins/genes in regulating telomere length is needed.
Background Bacterial wilt caused by Ralstonia solanacearum species complex (RSSC) is one of the devastating diseases in crop production, seriously reducing the yield of crops. R. pseudosolanacearum, is known for its broad infrasubspecific diversity and comprises 36 sequevars that are currently known. Previous studies found that R. pseudosolanacearum contained four sequevars (13, 14, 17 and 54) isolated from sunflowers sown in the same field. Results Here, we provided the complete genomes and the results of genome comparison of the four sequevars strains (RS639, RS642, RS647, and RS650). Four strains showed different pathogenicities to the same cultivars and different host ranges. Their genome sizes were about 5.84 5.94 Mb, encoding 5002 5079 genes and the average G + C content of 66.85% 67%. Among the coding genes, 146 159 specific gene families (contained 150 160 genes) were found in the chromosomes and 34 77 specific gene families (contained 34 78 genes) in the megaplasmids from four strains. The average nucleotide identify (ANI) values between any two strains ranged from 99.05% 99.71%, and the proportion of the total base length of collinear blocks accounts for the total gene length of corresponding genome was all more than 93.82%. Then, we performed a search for genomic islands, prophage sequences, the gene clusters macromolecular secretion systems, type III secreted effectors and other virulence factors in these strains, which provided detailed comparison results of their presence and distinctive features compared to the reference strain GMI1000. Among them, the number and types of T2SS gene clusters were different in the four strains, among which RS650 included all five types. T4SS gene cluster of RS639 and RS647 were missed. In the T6SS gene cluster, several genes were inserted in the RS639, RS647, and RS650, and gene deletion was also detected in the RS642. A total of 78 kinds of type III secreted effectors were found, which included 52 core and 9 specific effectors in four strains. Conclusion This study not only provided the complete genomes of multiple R. pseudosolanacearum strains isolated from a new host, but also revealed the differences in their genomic levels through comparative genomics. Furthermore, these findings expand human knowledge about the range of hosts that Ralstonia can infect, and potentially contribute to exploring rules and factors of the genetic evolution and analyzing its pathogenic mechanism.
Background The peri-implantation period is a critical time during pregnancy that mostly defines the overall litter size. Most authors agree that the highest percentage of embryo mortality occurs during this time. Despite the brevity of the peri-implantation period, it is the most dynamic part of pregnancy in which the sequential and uninterrupted course of several processes is essential to the animal's reproductive success. Also then, the maternal uterine tissues undergo an intensive remodelling process, and their energy demand dramatically increases. It is believed that apelin, a member of the adipokine family, is involved in the control of female reproductive functions in response to the current metabolic state. The verified herein hypothesis assumed the modulatory effect of apelin on the endometrial tissue transcriptome on days 15 to 16 of gestation (beginning of implantation).Results The analysis of data obtained during RNA-seq (Illumina HiSeq2500) of endometrial slices treated and untreated with apelin (n = 4 per group) revealed changes in the expression of 68 genes (39 up-regulated and 29 down-regulated in the presence of apelin), assigned to 240 gene ontology terms. We also revealed changes in the frequency of alternative splicing events (397 cases), as well as single nucleotide variants (1,818 cases) in the presence of the adipokine. The identified genes were associated, among others, with the composition of the extracellular matrix, apoptosis, and angiogenesis.Conclusions The obtained results indicate a potential role of apelin in the regulation of uterine tissue remodelling during the peri-implantation period.
BackgroundThe ubiquity of sex across eukaryotes, given its high costs, strongly suggests it is evolutionarily advantageous. Asexual lineages can avoid, for example, the risks and energetic costs of recombination, but suffer short-term reductions in adaptive potential and long-term damage to genome integrity. Despite these costs, lichenized fungi have frequently evolved asexual reproduction, likely because it allows the retention of symbiotic algae across generations. The lichenized fungal genus Lepraria is thought to be exclusively asexual, while its sister genus Stereocaulon completes a sexual reproductive cycle. A comparison of sister sexual and asexual clades should shed light on the evolution of asexuality in lichens in general, as well as the apparent long-term maintenance of asexuality in Lepraria, specifically.ResultsIn this study, we assembled and annotated representative long-read genomes from the putatively asexual Lepraria genus and its sexual sister genus Stereocaulon, and added short-read assemblies from an additional 22 individuals across both genera. Comparative genomic analyses revealed that both genera were heterothallic, with intact mating-type loci of both idiomorphs present across each genus. Additionally, we identified and assessed 29 genes involved in meiosis and mitosis and 45 genes that contribute to formation of fungal sexual reproductive structures (ascomata). All genes were present and appeared functional in nearly all Lepraria, and we failed to identify a general pattern of relaxation of selection on these genes across the Lepraria lineage. Together, these results suggest that Lepraria may be capable of sexual reproduction, including mate recognition, meiosis, and production of ascomata.ConclusionsDespite apparent maintenance of machinery essential for fungal sex, over 200 years of careful observations by lichenologists have produced no evidence of canonical sexual reproduction in Lepraria. We suggest that Lepraria may have instead evolved a form of parasexual reproduction, perhaps by repurposing MAT and meiosis-specific genes. This may, in turn, allow these lichenized fungi to avoid long-term consequences of asexuality, while maintaining the benefit of an unbroken bond with their algal symbionts.
Inherited hearing impairment is a remarkably heterogeneous monogenic condition, involving hundreds of genes, most of them with very small (< 1%) epidemiological contributions. The exception is GJB2, the gene encoding connexin-26 and underlying DFNB1, which is the most frequent type of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment (ARNSHI) in most populations (up to 40% of ARNSHI cases). DFNB1 is caused by different types of pathogenic variants in GJB2, but also by large deletions that keep the gene intact but remove an upstream regulatory element that is essential for its expression. Such large deletions, found in most populations, behave as complete loss-of-function variants, usually associated with a profound hearing impairment. By using CRISPR-Cas9 genetic edition, we have generated a murine model (Dfnb1(em274)) that reproduces the most frequent of those deletions, del(GJB6-D13S1830). Dfnb1(em274) homozygous mice are viable, bypassing the embryonic lethality of the Gjb2 knockout, and present a phenotype of profound hearing loss (> 90 dB SPL) that correlates with specific structural abnormalities in the cochlea. We show that Gjb2 expression is nearly abolished and its protein product, Cx26, is nearly absent all throughout the cochlea, unlike previous conditional knockouts in which Gjb2 ablation was not obtained in all cell types. The Dfnb1(em274) model recapitulates the clinical presentation of patients harbouring the del(GJB6-D13S1830) variant and thus it is a valuable tool to study the pathological mechanisms of DFNB1 and to assay therapies for this most frequent type of human ARNSHI.
Background The formation of pharmacologically active components in medicinal plants is significantly impacted by DNA methylation. However, the exact mechanisms through which DNA methylation regulates secondary metabolism remain incompletely understood. Research in model species has demonstrated that DNA methylation at the transcription factor binding site within functional gene promoters can impact the binding of transcription factors to target DNA, subsequently influencing gene expression. These findings suggest that the interaction between transcription factors and target DNA could be a significant mechanism through which DNA methylation regulates secondary metabolism in medicinal plants. Results This research conducted a comprehensive analysis of the NAC family in E. senticosus, encompassing genome-wide characterization and functional analysis. A total of 117 EsNAC genes were identified and phylogenetically divided into 15 subfamilies. Tandem duplications and chromosome segment duplications were found to be the primary replication modes of these genes. Motif 2 was identified as the core conserved motif of the genes, and the cis-acting elements, gene structures, and expression patterns of each EsNAC gene were different. EsJUB1, EsNAC047, EsNAC098, and EsNAC005 were significantly associated with the DNA methylation ratio in E. senticosus. These four genes were located in the nucleus or cytoplasm and exhibited transcriptional self-activation activity. DNA methylation in EsFPS, EsSS, and EsSE promoters significantly reduced their activity. The methyl groups added to cytosine directly hindered the binding of the promoters to EsJUB1, EsNAC047, EsNAC098, and EsNAC005 and altered the expression of EsFPS, EsSS, and EsSE genes, eventually leading to changes in saponin synthesis in E. senticosus. Conclusions NAC transcription factors that are hindered from binding by methylated DNA are found in E. senticosus. The incapacity of these NACs to bind to the promoter of the methylated saponin synthase gene leads to subsequent alterations in gene expression and saponin synthesis. This research is the initial evidence showcasing the involvement of EsNAC in governing the impact of DNA methylation on saponin production in E. senticosus.
Genomic dissection of genetic effects on desirable traits and the subsequent use of genomic selection hold great promise for accelerating the rate of genetic improvement of forest tree species. In this study, a total of 661 offspring trees from 66 open-pollinated families of Japanese larch (Larix kaempferi (Lam.) Carriere) were sampled at a test site. The contributions of additive and non-additive effects (dominance, imprinting and epistasis) were evaluated for nine valuable traits related to growth, wood physical and chemical properties, and competitive ability using three pedigree-based and four Genomics-based Best Linear Unbiased Predictions (GBLUP) models and used to determine the genetic model. The predictive ability (PA) of two genomic prediction methods, GBLUP and Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS), was compared. The traits could be classified into two types based on different quantitative genetic architectures: for type I, including wood chemical properties and Pilodyn penetration, additive effect is the main source of variation (38.20-67.46%); for type II, including growth, competitive ability and acoustic velocity, epistasis plays a significant role (50.76-91.26%). Dominance and imprinting showed low to moderate contributions (< 36.26%). GBLUP was more suitable for traits of type I (PAs = 0.37-0.39 vs. 0.14-0.25), and RKHS was more suitable for traits of type II (PAs = 0.23-0.37 vs. 0.07-0.23). Non-additive effects make no meaningful contribution to the enhancement of PA of GBLUP method for all traits. These findings enhance our current understanding of the architecture of quantitative traits and lay the foundation for the development of genomic selection strategies in Japanese larch.
BackgroundThe rose is one of the most important ornamental flowers in the world for its aesthetic beauty but can be attacked by many pests such as aphids. Aphid infestation causes tremendous damage on plant tissues leading to harmed petals and leaves. Rose cultivars express different levels of resistance to aphid infestation yet the information remains unclear. Not only that, studies about the transcriptional analysis on defending mechanisms against aphids in rose are limited so far.ResultsIn this study, the aphid resistance of 20 rose cultivars was evaluated, and they could be sorted into six levels based on the number ratio of aphids. And then, a transcriptome analysis was conducted after aphid infestation in one high resistance (R, Harmonie) and one highly susceptibility (S, Carefree Wonder) rose cultivar. In open environment the majority of rose cultivars had the highest aphid number at May 6th or May 15th in 2020 and the resistance to infestation could be classified into six levels. Differential expression analysis revealed that there were 1,626 upregulated and 767 downregulated genes in the R cultivar and 481 upregulated and 63 downregulated genes in the S cultivar after aphid infestation. Pathway enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed genes revealed that upregulated genes in R and S cultivars were both enriched in defense response, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites (phenylpropanoid, alkaloid, and flavonoid), carbohydrate metabolism (galactose, starch, and sucrose metabolism) and lipid processing (alpha-linolenic acid and linolenic acid metabolism) pathways. In the jasmonic acid metabolic pathway, linoleate 13S-lipoxygenase was specifically upregulated in the R cultivar, while genes encoding other crucial enzymes, allene oxide synthase, allene oxide cyclase, and 12-oxophytodienoate reductase were upregulated in both cultivars. Transcription factor analysis and transcription factor binding search showed that WRKY transcription factors play a pivotal role during aphid infestation in the R cultivar.ConclusionsOur study indicated the potential roles of jasmonic acid metabolism and WRKY transcription factors during aphid resistance in rose, providing clues for future research.
Domesticated safflower (Carthamus tinctorius L.) is a widely cultivated edible oil crop. However, despite its economic importance, the genetic basis underlying key traits such as oil content, resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses, and flowering time remains poorly understood. Here, we present the genome assembly for C. tinctorius variety Jihong01, which was obtained by integrating Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) and BGI-SEQ500 sequencing results. The assembled genome was 1,061.1 Mb, and consisted of 32,379 protein-coding genes, 97.71% of which were functionally annotated. Safflower had a recent whole genome duplication (WGD) event in evolution history and diverged from sunflower approximately 37.3 million years ago. Through comparative genomic analysis at five seed development stages, we unveiled the pivotal roles of fatty acid desaturase 2 (FAD2) and fatty acid desaturase 6 (FAD6) in linoleic acid (LA) biosynthesis. Similarly, the differential gene expression analysis further reinforced the significance of these genes in regulating LA accumulation. Moreover, our investigation of seed fatty acid composition at different seed developmental stages unveiled the crucial roles of FAD2 and FAD6 in LA biosynthesis. These findings offer important insights into enhancing breeding programs for the improvement of quality traits and provide reference resource for further research on the natural properties of safflower.
Human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are the germline embedded proviral fragments of ancient retroviral infections that make up roughly 8% of the human genome. Our understanding of HERVs in physiology primarily surrounds their non-coding functions, while their protein coding capacity remains virtually uncharacterized. Therefore, we applied the bioinformatic pipeline "hervQuant" to high-resolution ribosomal profiling of healthy tissues to provide a comprehensive overview of translationally active HERVs. We find that HERVs account for 0.1-0.4% of all translation in distinct tissue-specific profiles. Collectively, our study further supports claims that HERVs are actively translated throughout healthy tissues to provide sequences of retroviral origin to the human proteome.
Background In bivalves, the rate at which organisms grow is a major functional trait underlying many aspects of their commercial production. Growth is a highly polygenic trait, which is typically regulated by many genes with small to moderate effects. Due to its complexity, growth variability in such shellfish remains poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to investigate differential gene expression among spat of the pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera with distinct growth phenotypes. Results We selected two groups of P. margaritifera spat belonging to the same F2 cohort based on their growth performance at 5.5 months old. Transcriptome profile analysis identified a total of 394 differentially expressed genes between these Fast-growing (F) and Slow-growing (S) phenotypes. According to functional enrichment analysis, S oysters overexpressed genes associated with stress-pathways and regulation of innate immune responses. In contrast, F oysters up-regulated genes associated with cytoskeleton activity, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Analysis of genome polymorphism identified 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) significantly associated with the growth phenotypes. SNP effect categorization revealed one SNP identified for high effect and annotated for a stop codon gained mutation. Interestingly, this SNP is located within a gene annotated for scavenger receptor class F member 1 (SRF1), which is known to modulate apoptosis. Our analyses also revealed that all F oysters showed up-regulation for this gene and were homozygous for the stop-codon mutation. Conversely, S oysters had a heterozygous genotype and a reduced expression of this gene. Conclusions Altogether, our findings suggest that differences in growth among the same oyster cohort may be explained by contrasted metabolic allocation between regulatory pathways for growth and the immune system. This study provides a valuable contribution towards our understanding of the molecular components associated with growth performance in the pearl oyster P. margaritifera and bivalves in general.
ARs plays a crucial role in plant morphogenesis and development. The limited and inefficient rooting of scions poses a significant challenge to the efficiency and quality of clonal propagation of forest trees in silvicultural practices. Building on previous research conducted by our team, we found that applying IBA at a concentration of 1000 mg/L significantly enhanced mulberry rooting. This study aims to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlying this effect by analyzing RNA sequencing data from mulberry phloem before and after treatment with IBA over time intervals of 10, 20, 30, and 40 days. We identified 5226 DEGs, which were then classified into GO terms and KEGG pathways, showing significant enrichment in hormone signaling processes. Using WGCNA, we identified eight co-expression modules, two of which were significantly correlated with the IBA treatment. Additionally, 18 transcription factors that potentially facilitate ARs formation in mulberry were identified, and an exploratory analysis on the cis-regulatory elements associated with these transcription factors was conducted. The findings of this study provide a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms of ARs in mulberry and offer theoretical support for the discovery and utilization of exceptional genetic resources within the species.
Background Transcription factor (TF) proteins are a key component of the gene regulatory networks that control cellular fates and function. TFs bind DNA regulatory elements in a sequence-specific manner and modulate target gene expression through combinatorial interactions with each other, cofactors, and chromatin-modifying proteins. Large-scale studies over the last two decades have helped shed light on the complex network of TFs that regulate development in Drosophila melanogaster. Results Here, we present a detailed characterization of expression of all known and predicted Drosophila TFs in two well-established embryonic cell lines, Kc167 and S2 cells. Using deep coverage RNA sequencing approaches we investigate the transcriptional profile of all 707 TF coding genes in both cell types. Only 103 TFs have no detectable expression in either cell line and 493 TFs have a read count of 5 or greater in at least one of the cell lines. The 493 TFs belong to 54 different DNA-binding domain families, with significant enrichment of those in the zf-C2H2 family. We identified 123 differentially expressed genes, with 57 expressed at significantly higher levels in Kc167 cells than S2 cells, and 66 expressed at significantly lower levels in Kc167 cells than S2 cells. Network mapping reveals that many of these TFs are crucial components of regulatory networks involved in cell proliferation, cell-cell signaling pathways, and eye development. Conclusions We produced a reference TF coding gene expression dataset in the extensively studied Drosophila Kc167 and S2 embryonic cell lines, and gained insight into the TF regulatory networks that control the activity of these cells.
Background The pig (Sus Scrofa) is one of the oldest domesticated livestock species that has undergone extensive improvement through modern breeding. European breeds have advantages in lean meat development and highly-productive body type, whereas Asian breeds possess extraordinary fat deposition and reproductive performance. Consequently, Eurasian breeds have been extensively used to develop modern commercial breeds for fast-growing and high prolificacy. However, limited by the sequencing technology, the genome architecture of some nascent developed breeds and the human-mediated impact on their genomes are still unknown.Results Through whole-genome analysis of 178 individuals from an Asian locally developed pig breed, Beijing Black pig, and its two ancestors from two different continents, we found the pervasive inconsistent gene trees and species trees across the genome of Beijing Black pig, which suggests its introgressive hybrid origin. Interestingly, we discovered that this developed breed has more genetic relationships with European pigs and an unexpected introgression from Asian pigs to this breed, which indicated that human-mediated introgression could form the porcine genome architecture in a completely different type compared to native introgression. We identified 554 genomic regions occupied 63.30 Mb with signals of introgression from the Asian ancestry to Beijing Black pig, and the genes in these regions enriched in pathways associated with meat quality, fertility, and disease-resistant. Additionally, a proportion of 7.77% of genomic regions were recognized as regions that have been under selection. Moreover, combined with the results of a genome-wide association study for meat quality traits in the 1537 Beijing Black pig population, two important candidate genes related to meat quality traits were identified. DNAJC6 is related to intramuscular fat content and fat deposition, and RUFY4 is related to meat pH and tenderness.Conclusions Our research provides insight for analyzing the origins of nascent developed breeds and genome-wide selection remaining in the developed breeds mediated by humans during modern breeding.
Drought, a prevalent abiotic stressor, significantly impacts plant yield and quality. Melatonin (MT), a potent and economical growth regulator, plays a pivotal role in augmenting crop resilience against stress. This study investigated the efficacy of exogenous MT on drought-stressed celery seedlings by comprehensively analyzing phenotypic, physiological, and molecular attributes. The results revealed that exogenous MT mitigated celery seedling damage under drought stress, lowered malondialdehyde (MDA) concentrations, elevated oxidase activities, osmolyte levels, chlorophyll content, and augmented light energy conversion efficiency. Transcriptomic analysis demonstrated that MT could regulate chlorophyll synthesis genes (AgPORA1 and AgDVR2), contributing to heightened photosynthetic potential and increased drought tolerance in celery. Moreover, MT was found to modulate glycolytic pathways, upregulate pyruvate synthesis genes (AgPEP1 and AgPK3), and downregulate degradation genes (AgPDC2 and AgPDHA2), thereby promoting pyruvate accumulation and enhancing peroxidase activity and drought tolerance. The RNA-seq and qRT-PCR analyses demonstrated similar results, showing the same general expression trends. The study elucidates the physiological and molecular mechanisms underlying MT's stress-alleviating effects in celery seedlings, offering insights into MT-based strategies in plant cultivation and breeding for arid environments.
Background Rose is recognized as an important ornamental plant worldwide, and it is also one of the most widely used flowers in gardens. At present, the improvement of rose traits is still difficult and uncertain, and molecular breeding can provide new ideas for the improvement of modern rose varieties. Somatic embryos are quite good receptors for genetic transformation. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying during the regeneration process of rose somatic embryos. To elucidate the molecular regulation mechanism of somatic embryo plantlet regeneration, the relationship between the differences in traits of the two different regenerated materials and the significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to phytohormone pathways in the process of regeneration were be investigated. Results These representative two regenerated samples from single-piece cotyledonary somatic embryo (SPC) culture of Rosa hybrida 'John F. Kennedy', were harvested for transcriptome analysis, with the SPC explants at the initial culture (Day 0) as the control. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the materials from two different types for regeneration approach (SBF type: the regeneration approach type of single bud formed from SPC explants; MBF type: the regeneration approach type of multiple buds formed from SPC explants) were be screened by means of the transcriptome sequencing technology. In this study, a total of about 396.24 million clean reads were obtained, of which 78.95-82.92% were localized to the reference genome, compared with the initial material (CK sample), there were 5594 specific genes in the material of SBF type and 6142 specific genes in the MBF type. The DEGs from the SBF type material were mainly concentrated in the biological processes of GO terms such as phytohormones, substance transport, cell differentiation, and redox reaction. The KEGG enrichment analysis revealed these DEGs were more active in ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinone biosynthesis, fatty acid elongation, steroid biosynthesis, and glycosphingolipid biosynthesis-globo and isoglobo series. In contrast, the DEGs induced by the MBF type material were mainly associated with the biological processes such as phytohormones, phosphorylation, photosynthesis and signal transduction. According to KEGG analysis, these DEGs of MBF type were significantly enriched in the porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism, brassinosteroid biosynthesis, carotenoid biosynthesis, and peroxisome. Furthermore, the results from the phytohormone pathways analysis showed that the auxin-responsive factor SAUR and the cell wall modifying enzyme gene XTH were upregulated for expression but the protein phosphatase gene PP2C was downregulated for expression in SBF type; the higher expression of the ethylene receptor ETR, the ethylene transduction genes EBF1/2, the transcription factor EIN3, and the ethylene-responsive transcription factor ERF1/2 were induced by MBF type. Conclusions According to the GO and KEGG analysis, it indicated the DEGs between two different regenerated materials from somatic embryos were significantly different which might be causing morphological differences. That was somatic embryos from Rosa hybrida 'John F. Kennedy' could regenerate plantlet via both classic somatic embryogenesis (seed-like germination) and organogenesis, cotyledonary somatic embryos should be considered as one kind of intermediate materials similiar to callus, rather than the indicator materials for somatic embryogenesis.
Background Myogenic factor 6 (Myf6) plays an important role in muscle growth and differentiation. In aquatic animals and livestock, Myf6 contributes to improving meat quality and strengthening the accumulation of muscle flavor substances. However, studies on Myf6 gene polymorphisms in crustaceans have not been reported. Results In the current study, we characterized the Myf6 gene for Portunus trituberculatus to better understand its biological function. The full-length cDNA of Myf6 was 4,101 bp, with a 915 bp open reading frame encoding 304 amino acids. In addition, Myf6 included a conservative bHLH domain. Homology analysis showed that Myf6 shared the highest identity with Penaeus vannamei. Expression pattern analysis of Myf6 in fast- and slow-growing groups revealed that the expression level of the latter was significantly higher than that of the former (P < 0.05). qPCR studies revealed that Myf6 was expressed in various tissues with the highest level in muscle. Nineteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of Myf6 were identified and five of them were significantly associated with growth-related traits of P. trituberculatus (P < 0.05), including full carapace width, carapace length, body height, and body weight. The AG and GG genotypes of g.1,187,834 A > G exhibited superior growth-related traits than the AA genotype. In the combined genotypes of g.1,187,324 C > T and g.1,187,834 A > G, the average body weight of diplotype D5 (CT-GG) was higher than that of diplotype D1 (CC-AA), D2 (CC-AG), and D3 (CC-GG) in a cultivated population. A haploblock was generated by three significant SNPs (g.1187834 A > G, g.1188616 A > G, and g.1189024 C > A), containing four haplotypes (AAA, AAC, AGC, and GGC), among which GGC haplotype exhibited superior growth traits (full carapace width and body weight) than the AAA haplotype. Conclusions To our knowledge, this is the first report on Myf6 in crustaceans. The results of this study would contribute to elucidating multiple functions of the Myf6 gene in crustaceans and exploring the potential as a candidate gene in selective breeding programs of P. trituberculatus.
Heterosis, recognized for improving crop performance, especially in the first filial (F-1) generation, remains an area of significant study in the tobacco industry. The low utilization of leaf veins in tobacco contributes to economic inefficiency and resource waste. Despite the positive impacts of heterosis on crop genetics, investigations into leaf-vein ratio heterosis in tobacco have been lacking. Understanding the mechanisms underlying negative heterosis in leaf vein ratio at the molecular level is crucial for advancing low vein ratio leaf breeding research. This study involved 12 hybrid combinations and their parental lines to explore heterosis associated with leaf vein ratios. The hybrids displayed diverse patterns of positive or negative leaf vein ratio heterosis across different developmental stages. Notably, the F-1 hybrid (G70 x Qinggeng) consistently exhibited substantial negative heterosis, reaching a maximum of -19.79% 80 days after transplanting. A comparative transcriptome analysis revealed that a significant proportion of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), approximately 39.04% and 23.73%, exhibited dominant and over-dominant expression patterns, respectively. These findings highlight the critical role of non-additive gene expression, particularly the dominance pattern, in governing leaf vein ratio heterosis. The non-additive genes, largely associated with various GO terms such as response to abiotic stimuli, galactose metabolic process, plant-type cell wall organization, auxin-activated signaling pathway, hydrolase activity, and UDP-glycosyltransferase activity, were identified. Furthermore, KEGG enrichment analysis unveiled their involvement in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, galactose metabolism, plant hormone signal transduction, glutathione metabolism, MAPK signaling pathway, starch, and sucrose metabolism. Among the non-additive genes, we identified some genes related to leaf development, leaf size, leaf senescence, and cell wall extensibility that showed significantly lower expression in F-1 than in its parents. These results indicate that the non-additive expression of genes plays a key role in the heterosis of the leaf vein ratio in tobacco. This study marks the first exploration into the molecular mechanisms governing leaf vein ratio heterosis at the transcriptome level. These findings significantly contribute to understanding leaf vein ratios in tobacco breeding strategies.
Background Normalization is a critical step in the analysis of single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) datasets. Its main goal is to make gene counts comparable within and between cells. To do so, normalization methods must account for technical and biological variability. Numerous normalization methods have been developed addressing different sources of dispersion and making specific assumptions about the count data.Main body The selection of a normalization method has a direct impact on downstream analysis, for example differential gene expression and cluster identification. Thus, the objective of this review is to guide the reader in making an informed decision on the most appropriate normalization method to use. To this aim, we first give an overview of the different single cell sequencing platforms and methods commonly used including isolation and library preparation protocols. Next, we discuss the inherent sources of variability of scRNA-seq datasets. We describe the categories of normalization methods and include examples of each. We also delineate imputation and batch-effect correction methods. Furthermore, we describe data-driven metrics commonly used to evaluate the performance of normalization methods. We also discuss common scRNA-seq methods and toolkits used for integrated data analysis.Conclusions According to the correction performed, normalization methods can be broadly classified as within and between-sample algorithms. Moreover, with respect to the mathematical model used, normalization methods can further be classified into: global scaling methods, generalized linear models, mixed methods, and machine learning-based methods. Each of these methods depict pros and cons and make different statistical assumptions. However, there is no better performing normalization method. Instead, metrics such as silhouette width, K-nearest neighbor batch-effect test, or Highly Variable Genes are recommended to assess the performance of normalization methods.
Despite the fact that introns mean an energy and time burden for eukaryotic cells, they play an irreplaceable role in the diversification and regulation of protein production. As a common feature of eukaryotic genomes, it has been reported that in protein-coding genes, the longest intron is usually one of the first introns. The goal of our work was to find a possible difference in the biological function of genes that fulfill this common feature compared to genes that do not. Data on the lengths of all introns in genes were extracted from the genomes of six vertebrates (human, mouse, koala, chicken, zebrafish and fugu) and two other model organisms (nematode worm and arabidopsis). We showed that more than 40% of protein-coding genes have the relative position of the longest intron located in the second or third tertile of all introns. Genes divided according to the relative position of the longest intron were found to be significantly increased in different KEGG pathways. Genes with the longest intron in the first tertile predominate in a range of pathways for amino acid and lipid metabolism, various signaling, cell junctions or ABC transporters. Genes with the longest intron in the second or third tertile show increased representation in pathways associated with the formation and function of the spliceosome and ribosomes. In the two groups of genes defined in this way, we further demonstrated the difference in the length of the longest introns and the distribution of their absolute positions. We also pointed out other characteristics, namely the positive correlation between the length of the longest intron and the sum of the lengths of all other introns in the gene and the preservation of the exact same absolute and relative position of the longest intron between orthologous genes.
BackgroundVisium is a widely-used spatially-resolved transcriptomics assay available from 10x Genomics. Standard Visium capture areas (6.5mm by 6.5mm) limit the survey of larger tissue structures, but combining overlapping images and associated gene expression data allow for more complex study designs. Current software can handle nested or partial image overlaps, but is designed for merging up to two capture areas, and cannot account for some technical scenarios related to capture area alignment.ResultsWe generated Visium data from a postmortem human tissue sample such that two capture areas were partially overlapping and a third one was adjacent. We developed the R/Bioconductor package visiumStitched, which facilitates stitching the images together with Fiji (ImageJ), and constructing SpatialExperiment R objects with the stitched images and gene expression data. visiumStitched constructs an artificial hexagonal array grid which allows seamless downstream analyses such as spatially-aware clustering without discarding data from overlapping spots. Data stitched with visiumStitched can then be interactively visualized with spatialLIBD.ConclusionsvisiumStitched provides a simple, but flexible framework to handle various multi-capture area study design scenarios. Specifically, it resolves a data processing step without disrupting analysis workflows and without discarding data from overlapping spots. visiumStitched relies on affine transformations by Fiji, which have limitations and are less accurate when aligning against an atlas or other situations. visiumStitched provides an easy-to-use solution which expands possibilities for designing multi-capture area study designs.
BackgroundThe order Lepidoptera has an abundance of species, including both agriculturally beneficial and detrimental insects. Molecular data has been used to investigate the phylogenetic relationships of major subdivisions in Lepidoptera, which has enhanced our understanding of the evolutionary relationships at the family and superfamily levels. However, the phylogenetic placement of many superfamilies and/or families in this order is still unknown. In this study, we determine the systematic status of the family Argyresthiidae within Lepidoptera and explore its phylogenetic affinities and implications for the evolution of the order. We describe the first mitochondrial (mt) genome from a member of Argyresthiidae, the apple fruit moth Argyresthia conjugella. The insect is an important pest on apples in Fennoscandia, as it switches hosts when the main host fails to produce crops.ResultsThe mt genome of A. conjugella contains 16,044 bp and encodes all 37 genes commonly found in insect mt genomes, including 13 protein-coding genes (PCGs), two ribosomal RNAs, 22 transfer RNAs, and a large control region (1101 bp). The nucleotide composition was extremely AT-rich (82%). All detected PCGs (13) began with an ATN codon and terminated with a TAA stop codon, except the start codon in cox1 is ATT. All 22 tRNAs had cloverleaf secondary structures, except trnS1, where one of the dihydrouridine (DHU) arms is missing, reflecting potential differences in gene expression. When compared to the mt genomes of 507 other Lepidoptera representing 18 superfamilies and 42 families, phylogenomic analyses found that A. conjugella had the closest relationship with the Plutellidae family (Yponomeutoidea-super family). We also detected a sister relationship between Yponomeutoidea and the superfamily Tineidae.ConclusionsOur results underline the potential importance of mt genomes in comparative genomic analyses of Lepidoptera species and provide valuable evolutionary insight across the tree of Lepidoptera species.
Background X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is an epigenetic process that occurs during early development in mammalian females by randomly silencing one of two copies of the X chromosome in each cell. The preferential inactivation of either the maternal or paternal copy of the X chromosome in a majority of cells results in a skewed or non-random pattern of X inactivation and is observed in over 25% of adult females. Identifying skewed X inactivation is of clinical significance in patients with suspected rare genetic diseases due to the possibility of biased expression of disease-causing genes present on the active X chromosome. The current clinical test for the detection of skewed XCI relies on the methylation status of the methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme (Hpall) binding site present in proximity of short tandem polymorphic repeats on the androgen receptor (AR) gene. This approach using one locus results in uninformative or inconclusive data for 10-20% of tests. Further, recent studies have shown inconsistency between methylation of the AR locus and the state of inactivation of the X chromosome. Herein, we develop a method for estimating X inactivation status, using exome and transcriptome sequencing data derived from blood in 227 female samples. We built a reference model for evaluation of XCI in 135 females from the GTEx consortium. We tested and validated the model on 11 female individuals with different types of undiagnosed rare genetic disorders who were clinically tested for X-skew using the AR gene assay and compared results to our outlier-based analysis technique.Results In comparison to the AR clinical test for identification of X inactivation, our method was concordant with the AR method in 9 samples, discordant in 1, and provided a measure of X inactivation in 1 sample with uninformative clinical results. We applied this method on an additional 81 females presenting to the clinic with phenotypes consistent with different hereditary disorders without a known genetic diagnosis.Conclusions This study presents the use of transcriptome and exome sequencing data to provide an accurate and complete estimation of X-inactivation and skew status in a cohort of female patients with different types of suspected rare genetic disease.
Background Posterior capsular opacification (PCO) is the main reason affecting the long-term postoperative result of cataract patient, and it is well accepted that fibrotic PCO is driven by transforming growth factor beta (TGF beta) signaling. Ferroptosis, closely related to various ocular diseases, but has not been explored in PCO.Methods RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on both TGF-beta 2 treated and untreated primary lens epithelial cells (pLECs). Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with ferroptosis were analyzed using Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) to investigate their biological function. Additionally, protein-to-protein interactions among selected ferroptosis-related genes by PPI network and the top 10 genes with the highest score (MCC algorithm) were selected as the hub genes. The top 20 genes with significant fold change values were validated using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).Results Our analysis revealed 1253 DEGs between TGF-beta 2 treated and untreated pLECs, uncovering 38 ferroptosis-related genes between two groups. Among these 38 ferroptosis-related genes,the most prominent GO enrichment analysis process involved in the response to oxidative stress (BPs), apical part of cell (CCs),antioxidant activity (MFs). KEGG were mainly concentrated in fluid shear stress and atherosclerosis, IL-17 and TNF signaling pathways, and validation of top 20 genes with significant fold change value were consistent with RNA-seq.Conclusions Our RNA-Seq data identified 38 ferroptosis-related genes in TGF-beta 2 treated and untreated pLECs, which is the first observation of ferroptosis related genes in primary human lens epithelial cells under TGF-beta 2 stimulation.Graphical Abstract Our study initially observed ferroptosis related genes in primary human lens epithelial cells stimulated by TGF-beta 2. These findings may improve the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of PCO and provide a new direction for exploring the potential mechanisms of PCO
BackgroundMyoblasts play an important role in muscle growth and repair, but the high glucose environment severely affects their function. The purpose of this study is to explore the potential molecular mechanism of liraglutide in alleviating the effects of high glucose environments on myoblasts.MethodsMTT, western blot, and ELISA methods were used to investigate the role of liraglutide on C2C12 myoblasts induced by high glucose. The high-throughput transcriptome sequencing technique was used to sequence C2C12 myoblasts from different treated groups. The DESeq2 package was used to identify differentially expressed-mRNAs (DE-mRNAs). Then, functional annotations and alternative splicing (AS) were performed. The Cytoscape-CytoHubba plug-in was used to identify multicentric DE-mRNAs.ResultsThe MTT assay results showed that liraglutide can alleviate the decrease of myoblasts viability caused by high glucose. Western blot and ELISA tests showed that liraglutide can promote the expression of AMPK alpha and inhibit the expression of MAFbx, MuRF1 and 3-MH in myoblasts. A total of 15 multicentric DE-mRNAs were identified based on the Cytoscape-CytoHubba plug-in. Among them, Top2a had A3SS type AS. Functional annotation identifies multiple signaling pathways such as metabolic pathways, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, cAMP signaling pathway and cell cycle.ConclusionLiraglutide can alleviate the decrease of cell viability and degradation of muscle protein caused by high glucose, and improves cell metabolism and mitochondrial activity. The molecular mechanism of liraglutide to alleviate the effect of high glucose on myoblasts is complex. This study provides a theoretical basis for the clinical effectiveness of liraglutide in the treatment of skeletal muscle lesions in diabetes.
BackgroundHeterotrimeric G proteins are crucial signaling molecules involved in cell signaling, plant development, and stress response. However, the genome-wide identification and analysis of G proteins in castor (Ricinus communis L.) have not been researched.ResultsIn this study, RcG-protein genes were identified using a sequence alignment method and analyzed by bioinformatics and expression analysis in response to salt stress. The results showed that a total of 9 G-protein family members were identified in the castor genome, which were classified into three subgroups, with the majority of RcG-proteins showing homology to soybean G-protein members. The promoter regions of all RcG-protein genes contained antioxidant response elements and ABA-responsive elements. Go enrichment analysis displayed that RcG-protein genes were involved in the G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway, regulation of root development, and response to the bacterium. Real-time PCR showed varying responses of all RcG-protein genes to salt stress. RcGB1 was notably expressed in both roots and leaves under salt treatment, suggesting that it may be an essential gene associated with salt tolerance in the castor.ConclusionsThis study offers a theoretical framework for exploring G-protein function and presents potential genetic assets for improving crop resilience through genetic enhancement.
Eukaryotic messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are often modified with methyl groups at the N6 position of adenosine (m6A), and these changes are interpreted by YTH domain-containing proteins to regulate the metabolism of m6A-modified mRNAs. Although alfalfa (Medicago sativa) is an established model organism for forage development, the understanding of YTH proteins in alfalfa is still limited. In the present investigation, 53 putative YTH genes, each encoding a YT521 domain-containing protein, were identified within the alfalfa genome. These genes were categorized into two subfamilies: YTHDF (49 members) and YTHDC (four members). Each subfamily demonstrates analogous motif distributions and domain architectures. Specifically, proteins encoded by MsYTHDF genes incorporate a single domain structure, while those corresponding to MsYTH5, 8, 12, 16 who are identified as members of the MsYTHDC subfamily, exhibit CCCH-type zinc finger repeats at their N-termini. It is also observed that the predicted aromatic cage pocket that binds the m6A residue of MsYTHDC consists of a sequence of two tryptophan residues and one tyrosine residue (WWY). Conversely, in MsYTHDF, the binding pocket comprises two highly conserved tryptophan residues and either one tryptophan residue (WWW) or tyrosine residue (WWY) in MsYTHDF.Through comparative analysis of qRT-PCR data, we observed distinct expression patterns in specific genes under abiotic stress, indicating their potential regulatory roles. Notably, five genes (MsYTH2, 14, 26, 27, 48) consistently exhibit upregulation, and two genes (MsYTH33, 35) are downregulated in response to both cold and salt stress. This suggests a common mechanism among these YTH proteins in response to various abiotic stressors in alfalfa. Further, integrating qRT-PCR with RNA-seq data revealed that MsYTH2, MsYTH14, and MsYTH16 are highly expressed in leaves at various development stages, underscoring their potential roles in regulating the growth of these plant parts. The obtained findings shed further light on the biological functions of MsYTH genes and may aid in the selection of suitable candidate genes for future genetic enhancement endeavors aimed at improving salt and cold tolerance in alfalfa.
BackgroundSugar transporters (STs) play a critical role in the transportation of sugar, participating in plant growth and development, stress/defense responses, and signal transduction processes. Dendrobium catenatum (also known as Dendrobium officinale, hereinafter referred to as D. catenatum) is an important traditional Chinese medicinal herb with remarkable medicinal properties and possessing high economic value. Polysaccharides are the primary active components in D. catenatum, exhibiting diverse pharmacological activities. Sugar transporters function as material supplier and may play the essential roles in the polysaccharide biosynthesis, as well as the key reulators in the signaling and responses to abiotic stresses in Dendrobium plants. However, a comprehensive analysis of sugar transporters in D. catenatum remains elusive, thereby hindering our understanding of sugar partitioning within this species.ResultsIn this work, the members belonging to MST, SUT, and SWEET gene families were identified in four Dendrobium plants. A comprehensive study of sugar transporters was conducted in D. catenatum, including phylogenetic relationship, structural arrangement, regulatory networks, expression profiles, and potential functions analysis. Seven sugar transporters were found to be involved in the process of polysaccharide biosynthesis in D. catenatum. Red-blue light is an effective way to enhance the accumulation of polysaccharides, and exerts an influence on the expression of polysaccharide biosynthesis related genes.ConclusionsThis study provide insight into the evolution and functional annotation of sugar transporters in Dendrobium, and establishing a foundation for future functional research of sugar transporters involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis and stress response.
The Halimedineae are marine green macroalgae that play crucial roles as primary producers in various habitats, including coral reefs, rocky shores, embayments, lagoons, and seagrass beds. Several tropical species have calcified thalli, which contribute significantly to the formation of coral reefs. In this study, we investigated the codon usage patterns and the main factors influencing codon usage bias in 16 chloroplast genomes of the suborder Halimedineae. Nucleotide composition analysis revealed that the codons of these species were enriched in A/U bases and preferred to end in A/U bases, and the distribution of GC content followed a trend of GC1 > GC2 > GC3. 30 optimal codons encoding 17 amino acids were identified, and most of the optimal codons and all of the over-expressed codons preferentially ended with A/U. The neutrality plot, effective number of codons (ENc) plot, and parity rule 2 (PR2) plot analysis indicated that natural selection played a major role in shaping codon usage bias of the most Halimedineae species. The genetic relationships based on their RSCU values and chloroplast protein-coding genes showed the closely related species have similar codon usage patterns. This study describes, for the first time, the codon usage patterns and characterization of Halimedineae chloroplast genomes, and provides new insights into the evolution of this suborder.
BackgroundIntegration of high throughput DNA genotyping and RNA-sequencing data enables the discovery of genomic regions that regulate gene expression, known as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL). In pigs, efforts to date have been mainly focused on purebred lines for traits with commercial relevance as such growth and meat quality. However, little is known on genetic variants and mechanisms associated with the robustness of an animal, thus its overall health status. Here, the liver, lung, spleen, and muscle transcriptomes of 100 three-way crossbred female finishers were studied, with the aim of identifying novel eQTL regulatory regions and transcription factors (TFs) associated with regulation of porcine metabolism and health-related traits.ResultsAn expression genome-wide association study with 535,896 genotypes and the expression of 12,680 genes in liver, 13,310 genes in lung, 12,650 genes in spleen, and 12,595 genes in muscle resulted in 4,293, 10,630, 4,533, and 6,871 eQTL regions for each of these tissues, respectively. Although only a small fraction of the eQTLs were annotated as cis-eQTLs, these presented a higher number of polymorphisms per region and significantly stronger associations with their target gene compared to trans-eQTLs. Between 20 and 115 eQTL hotspots were identified across the four tissues. Interestingly, these were all enriched for immune-related biological processes. In spleen, two TFs were identified: ERF and ZNF45, with key roles in regulation of gene expression.ConclusionsThis study provides a comprehensive analysis with more than 26,000 eQTL regions identified that are now publicly available. The genomic regions and their variants were mostly associated with tissue-specific regulatory roles. However, some shared regions provide new insights into the complex regulation of genes and their interactions that are involved with important traits related to metabolism and immunity.
BackgroundCluster heatmaps are widely used in biology and other fields to uncover clustering patterns in data matrices. Most cluster heatmap packages provide utility functions to divide the dendrograms at a certain level to obtain clusters, but it is often difficult to locate the appropriate cut in the dendrogram to obtain the clusters seen in the heatmap or computed by a statistical method. Multiple cuts are required if the clusters locate at different levels in the dendrogram.ResultsWe developed DendroX, a web app that provides interactive visualization of a dendrogram where users can divide the dendrogram at any level and in any number of clusters and pass the labels of the identified clusters for functional analysis. Helper functions are provided to extract linkage matrices from cluster heatmap objects in R or Python to serve as input to the app. A graphic user interface was also developed to help prepare input files for DendroX from data matrices stored in delimited text files. The app is scalable and has been tested on dendrograms with tens of thousands of leaf nodes. As a case study, we clustered the gene expression signatures of 297 bioactive chemical compounds in the LINCS L1000 dataset and visualized them in DendroX. Seventeen biologically meaningful clusters were identified based on the structure of the dendrogram and the expression patterns in the heatmap. We found that one of the clusters consisting of mostly naturally occurring compounds is not previously reported and has its members sharing broad anticancer, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities.ConclusionsDendroX solves the problem of matching visually and computationally determined clusters in a cluster heatmap and helps users navigate among different parts of a dendrogram. The identification of a cluster of naturally occurring compounds with shared bioactivities implicates a convergence of biological effects through divergent mechanisms.
Background Orchardgrass (Dactylis glomerata L.), a perennial forage, has the advantages of rich leaves, high yield, and good quality and is one of the most significant forage for grassland animal husbandry and ecological management in southwest China. Mitochondrial (mt) genome is one of the major genetic systems in plants. Studying the mt genome of the genus Dactylis could provide more genetic information in addition to the nuclear genome project of the genus. Results In this study, we sequenced and assembled two mitochondrial genomes of Dactylis species of D. glomerata (597, 281 bp) and D. aschersoniana (613, 769 bp), based on a combination of PacBio and Illumina. The gene content in the mitochondrial genome of D. aschersoniana is almost identical to the mitochondrial genome of D. glomerata, which contains 22-23 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 8 ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and 30 transfer RNAs (tRNAs), while D. glomerata lacks the gene encoding the Ribosomal protein (rps1) and D. aschersoniana contains one pseudo gene (atp8). Twenty-three introns were found among eight of the 30 protein-coding genes, and introns of three genes (nad 1, nad2, and nad5) were trans-spliced in Dactylis aschersoniana. Further, our mitochondrial genome characteristics investigation of the genus Dactylis included codon usage, sequences repeats, RNA editing and selective pressure. The results showed that a large number of short repetitive sequences existed in the mitochondrial genome of D. aschersoniana, the size variation of two mitochondrial genomes is due largely to the presence of a large number of short repetitive sequences. We also identified 52-53 large fragments that were transferred from the chloroplast genome to the mitochondrial genome, and found that the similarity was more than 70%. ML and BI methods used in phylogenetic analysis revealed that the evolutionary status of the genus Dactylis. Conclusions Thus, this study reveals the significant rearrangements in the mt genomes of Pooideae species. The sequenced Dactylis mt genome can provide more genetic information and improve our evolutionary understanding of the mt genomes of gramineous plants.
BackgroundLottiidae (Gray, 1840) is a derived family of Patellogastropoda and an important component of intertidal benthic communities. The mitochondrial genome (mitogenome) has been frequently used to analyze the phylogenetic relationships of Patellogastropoda. We used next-generation sequencing (NGS) to sequence the complete mitogenomes of five species. We analyzed the basic base composition characteristics of these mitogenomes, constructed a phylogenetic tree, compared the characteristics of gene rearrangement with other related species, and discussed the evolutionary patterns between gastropod species and the evolutionary relationships of each subclass. In addition, we aim to infer the differentiation time and evolutionary characteristics of various species in the order Patellogastropoda. These results will enrich the mitogenome database of Patellogastropoda and enhance our understanding of the genetic characteristics of Lottiidae and the phylogenetic relationships between gastropods.ResultsWe obtained the mitogenomes sequences of Lottia peitaihoensis, Patelloida saccharinoides, Patelloida ryukyuensis, Nipponacmea sp. and Nipponacmea nigrans, using next-generation sequencing technology. We analyzed the basic structural characteristics of their mitogenomes and found that their lengths ranged from 16.6 kbp to 19.1 kbp. While N. nigrans and P. saccharinoides contain 39 genes, L. peitaihoensis, P. ryukyuensis, and Nipponacmea sp. have only 38 genes, with one trnW less. The most abundant base among the five species is T, and most protein coding genes (PCGs) use ATT, ATG, and ATA as starting codons, and TAA and TAG as stopping codons. We selected the mitogenomes of 10 Lottiidae species for selection pressure analysis and found that all PCGs were subject to purifying selection. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that Patellogastropoda is a fundamental branch of the Gastropoda, and Lottiidae, within Patellogastropoda, is an independent branch at the outermost of the entire phylogenetic tree. Comparison of mitochondrial gene sequences of all Patellogastropoda species revealed a high degree of gene rearrangement within the family Lottiidae, eight sequences present among the 10 species examined. By estimating their divergence times, we found that the divergence of limpets occurred as early as the Permian period of the Paleozoic Era, and a large number of species diverged in the Cenozoic Era.ConclusionThe data obtained from this study will provide information on the assembly of the mitochondrial genome of the Lottiidae species, which will contribute to a better understanding of the evolutionary status and relationship among thes family of Patellogastropoda.
Reliable and ultra-fast DNA and RNA sequencing have been achieved with the emergence of high-throughput sequencing technology. When combining the results of DNA and RNA sequencing for tumor cells of cancer patients, neoantigens that potentially stimulate the immune response of either CD4+ or CD8+ T cells can be identified. However, due to the abundance of somatic mutations and the high polymorphic nature of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) it is challenging to accurately predict the neoantigens. Moreover, comparing to HLA-I presented peptides, the HLA-II presented peptides are more variable in length, making the prediction of HLA-II loaded neoantigens even harder. A number of computational approaches have been proposed to address this issue but none of them considers the DNA origin of the neoantigens from the perspective of 3D genome. Here we investigate the DNA origins of the immune-positive and non-negative HLA-II neoantigens in the context of 3D genome and discovered that the chromatin 3D architecture plays an important role in more effective HLA-II neoantigen prediction. We believe that the 3D genome information will help to increase the precision of HLA-II neoantigen discovery and eventually benefit precision and personalized medicine in cancer immunotherapy.
Background Cow milk fat is an essential indicator for evaluating and measuring milk quality and cow performance. Growing research has identified the molecular functions of circular RNAs (circRNAs) necessary for mammary gland development and lactation in mammals.Method The present study analyzed circRNA expression profiling data in mammary epithelial cells (MECs) from cows with highly variable milk fat percentage (MFP) using differential expression analysis and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA).Results A total of 309 differentially expressed circRNAs (DE-circRNAs) were identified in the high and low MFP groups. WGCNA analysis revealed that the pink module was significantly associated with MFP (r = - 0.85, P = 0.007). Parental genes of circRNAs in this module were enriched mainly in lipid metabolism-related signaling pathways, such as focal adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, adherens junction and AMPK. Finally, six DE-circRNAs were screened from the pink module: circ_0010571, circ_0007797, circ_0002746, circ_0003052, circ_0004319, and circ_0012840. Among them, circ_0002746, circ_0003052, circ_0004319, and circ_0012840 had circular structures and were highly expressed in mammary tissues. Subcellular localization revealed that these four DE-circRNAs may play a regulatory role in the mammary glands of dairy cows, mainly as competitive endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs). Seven hub target genes (GNB1, GNG2, PLCB1, PLCG1, ATP6V0C, NDUFS4, and PIGH) were obtained by constructing the regulatory network of their ceRNAs and then analyzed by CytoHubba and MCODE plugins in Cytoscape. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that these genes are crucial and most probable ceRNA regulators in milk fat metabolism.Conclusions Our study identified several vital circRNAs and ceRNAs affecting milk fat synthesis, providing new research ideas and a theoretical basis for cow lactation, milk quality, and breed improvement.
BackgroundEven though the Buyei are a recognised ethnic group in southwestern China, there hasn't been much work done on forensic population genetics, notably using mitochondrial DNA. The sequences and haplogroups of mitochondrial DNA control regions of the Buyei peoples were studied to provide support for the establishment of a reference database for forensic DNA analysis in East Asia.Methods and resultsThe mitochondrial DNA control region sequences of 200 Buyei individuals in Guizhou were investigated. The haplotype frequencies and haplogroup distribution of the Buyei nationality in Guizhou were calculated. At the same time, the paired Fst values of the study population and other populations around the world were computed, to explore their genetic polymorphism and population relationship. A total of 179 haplotypes were detected in the Buyei population, with frequencies of 0.005-0.015. All haplotypes were assigned to 89 different haplogroups. The haplotype diversity and random matching probability were 0.999283 and 0.0063, respectively. The paired Fst genetic distances and correlation p-values among the 54 populations revealed that the Guizhou Buyei was most closely related to the Henan Han and the Guizhou Miao, and closer to the Hazara population in Pakistan and the Chiang Mai population.ConclusionsThe study of mitochondrial DNA based on the maternal genetic structure of the Buyei nationality in Guizhou will benefit the establishment of an East Asian forensic DNA reference database and provide a reference for anthropological research in the future.
BackgroundMitochondrial genome abnormalities can lead to mitochondrial dysfunction, which in turn affects cellular biology and is closely associated with the development of various diseases. The demand for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequencing has been increasing, and Illumina and MGI are two commonly used sequencing platforms for capture-based mtDNA sequencing. However, there is currently no systematic comparison of mtDNA sequencing performance between these two platforms. To address this gap, we compared the performance of capture-based mtDNA sequencing between Illumina's NovaSeq 6000 and MGI's DNBSEQ-T7 using tissue, peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC), formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue, plasma, and urine samples.ResultsOur analysis indicated a high degree of consistency between the two platforms in terms of sequencing quality, GC content, and coverage. In terms of data output, DNBSEQ-T7 showed higher rates of clean data and duplication compared to NovaSeq 6000. Conversely, the amount of mtDNA data obtained by per gigabyte sequencing data was significantly lower in DNBSEQ-T7 compared to NovaSeq 6000. In terms of detection mtDNA copy number, both platforms exhibited good consistency in all sample types. When it comes to detection of mtDNA mutations in tissue, FFPE, and PBMC samples, the two platforms also showed good consistency. However, when detecting mtDNA mutations in plasma and urine samples, significant differenceof themutation number detected was observed between the two platforms. For mtDNA sequencing of plasma and urine samples, a wider range of DNA fragment size distribution was found in NovaSeq 6000 when compared to DNBSEQ-T7. Additionally, two platforms exhibited different characteristics of mtDNA fragment end preference.ConclusionsIn summary, the two platforms generally showed good consistency in capture-based mtDNA sequencing. However, it is necessary to consider the data preferences generated by two sequencing platforms when plasma and urine samples were analyzed.
Background Eucalyptus regnans (Mountain Ash) is an Australian native giant tree species which form forests that are among the highest known carbon-dense biomasses in the world. To enhance genomic studies in this ecologically important species, we assembled a high-quality, mostly telomere-to-telomere complete, chromosome-level, haplotype-resolved reference genome. We sampled a single tree, the Centurion, which is currently a contender for the world's tallest flowering plant. Results Using long-read sequencing data (PacBio HiFi, Oxford Nanopore ultra-long reads) and chromosome conformation capture data (Hi-C), we assembled the most contiguous and complete Eucalyptus reference genome to date. For each haplotype, we observed contig N50s exceeding 36 Mbp, scaffold N50s exceeding 43 Mbp, and genome BUSCO completeness exceeding 99%. The assembled genome revealed extensive structural variations between the two haplotypes, consisting mostly of insertions, deletions, duplications and translocations. Analysis of gene content revealed haplotype-specific genes, which were enriched in functional categories related to transcription, energy production and conservation. Additionally, many genes reside within structurally rearranged regions, particularly duplications, suggesting that haplotype-specific variation may contribute to environmental adaptation in the species. Conclusions Our study provides a foundation for future research into E. regnans environmental adaptation, and the high-quality genome will be a powerful resource for conservation of carbon-dense giant tree forests.
BackgroundSingle-cell RNA sequencing experiments commonly use 10x Genomics (10x) kits due to their high-throughput capacity and standardized protocols. Recently, Parse Biosciences (Parse) introduced an alternative technology that uses multiple in-situ barcoding rounds within standard 96-well plates. Parse enables the analysis of more cells from multiple samples in a single run without the need for additional reagents or specialized microfluidics equipment. To evaluate the performance of both platforms, we conducted a benchmark study using biological and technical replicates of mouse thymus as a complex immune tissue.ResultsWe found that Parse detected nearly twice the number of genes compared to 10x, with each platform detecting a distinct set of genes. The comparison of multiplexed samples generated from 10x and Parse techniques showed 10x data to have lower technical variability and more precise annotation of biological states in the thymus compared to Parse.ConclusionOur results provide a comprehensive comparison of the suitability of both single-cell platforms for immunological studies.
Background Meniere's disease (MD) is a disorder of the inner ear that causes episodic bouts of severe dizziness, roaring tinnitus, and fluctuating hearing loss. To date, no targeted therapy exists. As such, we have undertaken a large whole genome sequencing study on carefully phenotyped unilateral MD patients with the goal of gene/pathway discovery and a move towards targeted intervention. This study was a retrospective review of patients with a history of Meniere's disease. Genomic DNA, acquired from saliva samples, was purified and subjected to whole genome sequencing. Results Stringent variant calling, performed on 511 samples passing quality checks, followed by gene-based filtering by recurrence and proximity in molecular interaction networks, led to 481 high priority MD genes. These high priority genes, including MPHOSPH8, MYO18A, TRIOBP, OTOGL, TNC, and MYO6, were previously implicated in hearing loss, balance, and cochlear function, and were significantly enriched in common variant studies of hearing loss. Validation in an independent MD cohort confirmed 82 recurrent genes. Pathway analysis pointed to cell-cell adhesion, extracellular matrix, and cellular energy maintenance as key mediators of MD. Furthermore, the MD-prioritized genes were highly expressed in human inner ear hair cells and dark/vestibular cells, and were differentially expressed in a mouse model of hearing loss. Conclusion By enabling the development of model systems that may lead to targeted therapies and MD screening panels, the genes and variants identified in this study will inform diagnosis and treatment of MD.
BackgroundMapping expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in skeletal muscle tissue in pigs is crucial for understanding the relationship between genetic variation and phenotypic expression of carcass traits in meat animals. Therefore, the primary objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of different sets of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), including scenarios removing SNPs pruned for linkage disequilibrium (LD) and SNPs derived from SNP chip arrays and RNA-seq data from liver, brain, and skeletal muscle tissues, on the identification of eQTLs in the Longissimus lumborum tissue, associated with carcass and body composition traits in Large White pigs. The SNPs identified from muscle mRNA were combined with SNPs identified in the brain and liver tissue transcriptomes, as well as SNPs from the GGP Porcine 50 K SNP chip array. Cis- and trans-eQTLs were identified based on the skeletal muscle gene expression level, followed by functional genomic analyses and statistical associations with carcass and body composition traits in Large White pigs.ResultsThe number of cis- and trans-eQTLs identified across different sets of SNPs (scenarios) ranged from 261 to 2,539 and from 29 to 13,721, respectively. Furthermore, 6,180 genes were modulated by eQTLs in at least one of the scenarios evaluated. The eQTLs identified were not significantly associated with carcass and body composition traits but were significantly enriched for many traits in the "Meat and Carcass" type QTL. The scenarios with the highest number of cis- (n = 304) and trans- (n = 5,993) modulated genes were the unpruned and LD-pruned SNP set scenarios identified from the muscle transcriptome. These genes include 84 transcription factor coding genes.ConclusionsAfter LD pruning, the set of SNPs identified based on the transcriptome of the skeletal muscle tissue of pigs resulted in the highest number of genes modulated by eQTLs. Most eQTLs are of the trans type and are associated with genes influencing complex traits in pigs, such as transcription factors and enhancers. Furthermore, the incorporation of SNPs from other genomic regions to the set of SNPs identified in the porcine skeletal muscle transcriptome contributed to the identification of eQTLs that had not been identified based on the porcine skeletal muscle transcriptome alone.
BackgroundAfrican cattle represent a unique resource of genetic diversity in response to adaptation to numerous environmental challenges. Characterising the genetic landscape of indigenous African cattle and identifying genomic regions and genes of functional importance can contribute to targeted breeding and tackle the loss of genetic diversity. However, pinpointing the adaptive variant and determining underlying functional mechanisms of adaptation remains challenging.ResultsIn this study, we use selection signatures from whole-genome sequence data of eight indigenous African cattle breeds in combination with gene expression and quantitative trait loci (QTL) databases to characterise genomic targets of artificial selection and environmental adaptation and to identify the underlying functional candidate genes. In general, the trait-association analyses of selection signatures suggest the innate and adaptive immune system and production traits as important selection targets. For example, a large genomic region, with selection signatures identified for all breeds except N'Dama, was located on BTA27, including multiple defensin DEFB coding-genes. Out of 22 analysed tissues, genes under putative selection were significantly enriched for those overexpressed in adipose tissue, blood, lung, testis and uterus. Our results further suggest that cis-eQTL are themselves selection targets; for most tissues, we found a positive correlation between allele frequency differences and cis-eQTL effect size, suggesting that positive selection acts directly on regulatory variants.ConclusionsBy combining selection signatures with information on gene expression and QTL, we were able to reveal compelling candidate selection targets that did not stand out from selection signature results alone (e.g. GIMAP8 for tick resistance and NDUFS3 for heat adaptation). Insights from this study will help to inform breeding and maintain diversity of locally adapted, and hence important, breeds.
BackgroundEpicardial adipose tissue (EAT) surrounds the heart and is hypothesised to play a role in the development of heart failure (HF). In this study, we first investigated the differences in gene expression between epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) in patients undergoing elective coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery (n = 21; 95% male). Secondly, we examined the association between EAT and SAT in patients at risk for HF stage A (n = 12) and in pre-HF patients, who show signs but not symptoms of HF, stage B (n = 9).ResultsThe study confirmed a distinct separation between EAT and SAT. In EAT 17 clusters of genes were present, of which several novel gene modules are associated with characteristics of HF. Notably, seven gene modules showed significant correlation to measures of HF, such as end diastolic left ventricular posterior wall thickness, e'mean, deceleration time and BMI. One module was particularly distinct in EAT when compared to SAT, featuring key genes such as FLT4, SEMA3A, and PTX3, which are implicated in angiogenesis, inflammation regulation, and tissue repair, suggesting a unique role in EAT linked to left ventricular dysfunction. Genetic expression was compared in EAT across all pre-HF and normal phenotypes, revealing small genetic changes in the form of 18 differentially expressed genes in ACC/AHA Stage A vs. Stage B.ConclusionsThe roles of subcutaneous and epicardial fat are clearly different. We highlight the gene expression difference in search of potential modifiers of HF progress. The true implications of our findings should be corroborated in other studies since HF ACC/AHA stage B patients are common and carry a considerable risk for progression to symptomatic HF.
BackgroundBamboo is an important nontimber forestry product worldwide, while growth, development and geographic distribution of bamboo are often affected by abiotic stresses. Fatty acid desaturases have important roles in regulating plant abiotic stress tolerance, especially low-temperature. However, there is no report on genome-wide of FAD genes in bamboo under abiotic stresses.ResultsA toltal of 43 PeFAD genes were identified in moso bamboo genome, which were unevenly located in 17 scaffolds. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that PeFAD genes were divided into 6 groups and ADS/FAD5 group was absence in momo bamboo, and gene structure and histidine-motifs remained highly conserved in each group. The expansion of PeFAD genes was mainly caused by tandem and segmental duplications of SAD/FAB2 group. We also identified 59 types of miRNAs targeting PeFAD genes. RNA-seq data indicated that PeFAD genes were transcribed in various organs/tissues with different degrees, and responded to abiotic stresses and hormone treatments, including cold, salt, drought, SA, ABA, BR, NAA and GA. Co-expression analysis under cold stress showed that PeCBF3 might directly bind the promoter of top cold-responsive PeSLD1 gene that contained LTR cis-element and DRE core element. The qRT-PCR assay also validated the expression pattern of PeSLD1 and its upstream regulatory gene PeCBF3.ConclusionIn this study, we performed comprehensive genome-wide survey of PeFAD genes in moso bamboo and analyzed their expression patterns in various tissues and organs, and under abiotic stresses and phytohormones treatment. The qRT-PCR assay validated the cold inducibility of PeSLD1 and PeCBF3. This work showed critical roles of PeFAD genes in abiotic stresses responses. This is the first report on genome-wide analysis of PeFAD genes in moso bamboo, which will provide critical gene resources for molecular breeding of stress-toleranct moso bamboo.
Dof transcription factor family in Cyperus esculentus genome was identified and analyzed using bioinformatics. The analysis results revealed that C.esculentus genome contains 29 Dof genes (CesDof), all of which are located in the nucleus according to subcellular localization prediction. CesDof proteinrs have a range of 124 to 512 amino acids, with most being basic proteins. Their secondary structure was mainly irregular curl. The promoter sequence of CesDof genes contains cis-acting elements that respond to light, drought, hormones, low temperature, and circadian rhythm. Codon preference analysis showed that CesDof genes' codon preference ends in T/A. Collinearity analysis revealed that C.esculentus had three pairs of collinear CesDof genes. Additionally, there were 15 pairs of collinear genes between C.esculentus and Arabidopsis thaliana. The genetic relationship between C.esculentus and Rhynchospora pubera was found to be the closest. Phylogenetic tree analysis revealed that 29 CesDof genes of C.esculentus can be classified into 4 subgroups. Additionally, 144 miRNAs were predicted to target these CesDof genes. Furthermore, protein interaction analysis indicated that 15 Dof proteins in C.esculentus had interactions. The qRT-PCR verification results of drought stress and salt stress treatment experiments showed that most CesDof genes were involved in drought stress and salt stress responses, and the gene expression trends under drought stress and salt stress conditions were consistent. These results lay a theoretical foundation for further studying the molecular functions of Dof gene family in C.esculentus and its molecular mechanisms in regulating the life activities of C.esculentus.
DNA binding with one finger(Dof) gene family is a class of transcription factors which play an important role on plant growth and development. Genome-wide identification results indicated that there were 45 Dof genes(ColDof) in C.oleifera genome. All 45 ColDof proteins were non-transmembrane and non-secretory proteins. Phosphorylation site analysis showed that biological function of ColDof proteins were mainly realized by phosphorylation at serine (Ser) site. The secondary structure of 44 ColDof proteins was dominated by random coil, and only one ColDof protein was dominated by alpha-helix. ColDof genes' promoter region contained a variety of cis-acting elements, including light responsive regulators, gibberellin responsive regulators, abscisic acid responsive regulators, auxin responsive regulators and drought induction responsive regulators. The SSR sites analysis showed that the proportion of single nucleotide repeats and the frequency of A/T in ColDof genes were the largest. Non-coding RNA analysis showed that 45 ColDof genes contained 232 miRNAs. Transcription factor binding sites of ColDof genes showed that ColDof genes had 5793 ERF binding sites, 4381 Dof binding sites, 2206 MYB binding sites, 3702 BCR-BPC binding sites. ColDof9, ColDof39 and ColDof44 were expected to have the most TFBSs. The collinearity analysis showed that there were 40 colinear locis between ColDof proteins and AtDof proteins. Phylogenetic analysis showed that ColDof gene family was most closely related to that of Camellia sinensis var. sinensis cv.Biyun and Camellia lanceoleosa. Protein-protein interaction analysis showed that ColDof34, ColDof20, ColDof28, ColDof35, ColDof42 and ColDof26 had the most protein interactions. The transcriptome analysis of C. oleifera seeds showed that 21 ColDof genes were involved in the growth and development process of C. oleifera seeds, and were expressed in 221 C. oleifera varieties. The results of qRT-PCR experiments treated with different concentrations NaCl and PEG6000 solutions indicated that ColDof1, ColDof2, ColDof14 and ColDof36 not only had significant molecular mechanisms for salt stress tolerance, but also significant molecular functions for drought stress tolerance in C. oleifera. The results of this study provide a reference for further understanding of the function of ColDof genes in C.oleifera.
To reveal the molecular function of elongation family of very long chain fatty acids(ELO) protein in Cyrtotrachelus buqueti, we have identified 15 ELO proteins from C.buqueti genome. 15 CbuELO proteins were located on four chromosomes. Their isoelectric points ranged from 9.22 to 9.68, and they were alkaline. These CbuELO proteins were stable and hydrophobic. CbuELO proteins had transmembrane movement, and had multiple phosphorylation sites. The secondary structure of CbuELO proteins was mainly alpha-helix. A total of 10 conserved motifs were identified in CbuELO protein family. Phylogenetic analysis showed that molecular evolutionary relationships of ELO protein family between C. buqueti and Tribolium castaneum was the closest. Developmental transcriptome analysis indicated that CbuELO10, CbuELO13 and CbuELO02 genes were key enzyme genes that determine the synthesis of very long chain fatty acids in pupae and eggs, CbuELO6 and CbuELO7 were that in the male, and CbuELO8 and CbuELO11 were that in the larva. Transcriptome analysis under different temperature conditions indicated that CbuELO1, CbuELO5, CbuELO12 and CbuELO14 participated in regulating temperature stress responses. Transcriptome analysis at different feeding times showed CbuELO12 gene expression level in all feeding time periods was significant downregulation. The qRT-PCR experiment verified expression level changes of CbuELO gene family under different temperature and feeding time conditions. Protein-protein interaction analysis showed that 9 CbuELO proteins were related to each other, CbuELO1, CbuELO4 and CbuELO12 had more than one interaction relationship. These results lay a theoretical foundation for further studying its molecular function during growth and development of C. buqueti.
Background Citrus is one of the most valuable fruits worldwide and an economic pillar industry in southern China. Nevertheless, it frequently suffers from undesirable environmental stresses during the growth cycle, which severely restricts the growth, development and yield of citrus. In plants, the growth-regulating factor (GRF) family of transcription factors (TF) is extensively distributed and plays an vital part in plant growth and development, hormone response, as well as stress adaptation. However, the systematic identification and functional analysis of GRF TFs in citrus have not been reported.Results Here, a genome-wide identification of GRF TFs was performed in Citrus sinensis, 9 members of CsGRFs were systematically identified and discovered to be scattered throughout 5 chromosomes. Subsequently, physical and chemical properties, phylogenetic relationships, structural characteristics, gene duplication events, collinearity and cis-elements of promoter were elaborately analyzed. In particular, the expression patterns of the CsGRF genes in response to multiple phytohormone and abiotic stress treatments were investigated. Predicated on this result, CsGRF04, which exhibited the most differential expression pattern under multiple phytohormone and abiotic stress treatments was screened out. Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) technology was utilized to obtain gene silenced plants for CsGRF04 successfully. After the three stress treatments of high salinity, low temperature and drought, the CsGRF04-VIGS lines showed significantly reduced resistance to high salinity and low temperature stresses, but extremely increased resistance to drought stress.Conclusions Taken together, our findings systematically analyzed the genomic characterization of GRF family in Citrus sinensis, and excavated a CsGRF04 with potential functions under multiple abiotic stresses. Our study lay a foundation for further study on the function of CsGRFs in abiotic stress and hormone signaling response.
Background The blunt snout bream (Megalobrama amblycephala) is an important economic freshwater fish in China with tender flesh and high nutritional value. With the cultivation of superior new varieties and the expansion of breeding scale, it becomes imperative to employ sex-control technology to cultivate monosexual populations of M. amblycephala, thereby preventing the deterioration of desirable traits. The development of specific markers capable of accurately identifying the sex of M. amblycephala would facilitate the determination of the genetic sex of the breeding population before gonad maturation, thereby expediting the processes of sex-controlled breeding of M. amblycephala. Results A whole-genome re-sequencing was performed for 116 females and 141 males M. amblycephala collected from nine populations. Seven candidate male-specific sequences were identified through comparative analysis of male and female genomes, which were further compared with the sequencing data of 257 individuals, and finally three male-specific sequences were generated. These three sequences were further validated by PCR amplification in 32 males and 32 females to confirm their potential as male-specific molecular markers for M. amblycephala. One of these markers showed potential applicability in M. pellegrini as well, enabling males to be identified using this specific molecular marker. Conclusions The study provides a high-efficiency and cost-effective approach for the genetic sex identification in two species of Megalobrama. The developed markers in this study have great potential in facilitating sex-controlled breeding of M. amblycephala and M. pellegrini, while also contributing valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms of fish sex determination.
Background A growing number of studies have demonstrated that the polar regions have the potential to be a significant repository of microbial resources and a potential source of active ingredients. Genome mining strategy plays a key role in the discovery of bioactive secondary metabolites (SMs) from microorganisms. This work highlighted deciphering the biosynthetic potential of an Arctic marine-derived strain Aspergillus sydowii MNP-2 by a combination of whole genome analysis and antiSMASH as well as feature-based molecular networking (MN) in the Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking (GNPS). Results In this study, a high-quality whole genome sequence of an Arctic marine strain MNP-2, with a size of 34.9 Mb was successfully obtained. Its total number of genes predicted by BRAKER software was 13,218, and that of non-coding RNAs (rRNA, sRNA, snRNA, and tRNA) predicted by using INFERNAL software was 204. AntiSMASH results indicated that strain MNP-2 harbors 56 biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs), including 18 NRPS/NRPS-like gene clusters, 10 PKS/PKS-like gene clusters, 8 terpene synthse gene clusters, 5 indole synthase gene clusters, 10 hybrid gene clusters, and 5 fungal-RiPP gene clusters. Metabolic analyses of strain MNP-2 grown on various media using GNPS networking revealed its great potential for the biosynthesis of bioactive SMs containing a variety of heterocyclic and bridge-ring structures. For example, compound G-8 exhibited a potent anti-HIV effect with an IC50 value of 7.2 nM and an EC50 value of 0.9 nM. Compound G-6 had excellent in vitro cytotoxicities against the K562, MCF-7, Hela, DU145, U1975, SGC-7901, A549, MOLT-4, and HL60 cell lines, with IC50 values ranging from 0.10 to 3.3 mu M, and showed significant anti-viral (H1N1 and H3N2) activities with IC50 values of 15.9 and 30.0 mu M, respectively. Conclusions These findings definitely improve our knowledge about the molecular biology of genus A. sydowii and would effectively unveil the biosynthetic potential of strain MNP-2 using genomics and metabolomics techniques.
Background The Japanese cedar (Cryptomeria japonica D. Don) is one of the most important Japanese forest trees, occupying approximately 44% of artificial forests and planted in East Asia, the Azores Archipelago, and certain islands in the Indian Ocean. Although the huge genome of the species (ca. 9 Gbp) with abundant repeat elements may have represented an obstacle for genetic analysis, this species is easily propagated by cutting, flowered by gibberellic acid, transformed by Agrobacterium, and edited by CRISPR/Cas9. These characteristics of C. japonica recommend it as a model conifer species for which reference genome sequences are necessary. Results Herein, we report the first chromosome-level assembly of C. japonica (2n = 22) using third-generation selfed progeny (estimated homozygosity rate = 0.96). Young leaf tissue was used to extract high molecular weight DNA (> 50 kb) for HiFi PacBio long-read sequencing and to construct an Hi-C/Omni-C library for Illumina short-read sequencing. The 29x and 26x genome coverage of HiFi and Illumina reads, respectively, for de novo assembly yielded 2,651 contigs (9.1 Gbp, N50 contig size 12.0 Mbp). Hi-C analysis mapped 97% of the nucleotides on 11 chromosomes. The assembly was verified through comparison with a consensus linkage map comprising 7,781 markers. BUSCO analysis identified similar to 91% conserved genes. Conclusions Annotations of genes and comparisons of repeat elements with other Cupressaceae and Pinaceae species provide a fundamental resource for conifer research.
BackgroundThe correlation between heading date and flowering time significantly regulates grain filling and seed formation in barley and other crops, ultimately determining crop productivity. In this study, the transcriptome, hormone content detection, and metabolome analysis were performed systematically to analyze the regulatory mechanism of heading time in highland barley under different light conditions. The heading date of D18 (winter highland barley variety, Dongqing18) was later than that of K13 (vernal highland barley variety) under normal growth conditions or long-day (LD) treatment, while this situation will reverse with short-day (SD) treatment.ResultsThe circadian rhythm plant, plant hormone signaling transduction, starch and sucrose metabolism, and photosynthesis-related pathways are significantly enriched in barley under SD and LD to influence heading time. In the plant circadian rhythm pathway, the key genes GI (Gigantea), PRR (Pesudoresponseregulator), FKF1 (Flavin-binding kelch pepeat F-Box 1), and FT (Flowering locus T) are identified as highly expressed in D18SD3 and K13SD2, while they are significantly down-regulated in K13SD3. These genes play an important role in regulating the heading date of D18 earlier than that of K13 under SD conditions. In photosynthesis-related pathways, a-b binding protein and RBS were highly expressed in K13LD3, while NADP-dependent malic enzyme, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase, and triosephosphate isomerase were significantly expressed in D18SD3. In the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway, 41 DEGs (differentially expressed genes) and related metabolites were identified as highly expressed and accumulated in D18SD3. The DEGs SAUR (Small auxin-up RNA), ARF (Auxin response factor), TIR1 (Transport inhibitor response 1), EIN3 (Ethylene-insensitive 3), ERS1 (Ethylene receptor gene), and JAZ1 (Jasmonate ZIM-domain) in the plant hormone pathway were significantly up-regulated in D18SD3. Compared with D18LD3, the content of N6-isopentenyladenine, indole-3-carboxylic acid, 1-aminocyclopropanecarboxylic acid, trans-zeatin, indole-3-carboxaldehyde, 1-O-indol-3-ylacetylglucose, and salicylic acid in D18SD3 also increased. The expression levels of vernalization genes (HvVRN1, HvVRN2, and HvVRN3), photoperiod genes (PPD), and PPDK (Pyruvate phosphate dikinase) that affect photosynthetic efficiency in barley are also analyzed, which play important regulatory roles in barley heading date. The WGCNA analysis of the metabolome data and circadian regulatory genes identified the key metabolites and candidate genes to regulate the heading time of barley in response to the photoperiod.ConclusionThese studies will provide a reference for the regulation mechanism of flowering and the heading date of highland barley.
BackgroundInsecticide resistance is jeopardising malaria control efforts in Africa. Deciphering the evolutionary dynamics of mosquito populations country-wide is essential for designing effective and sustainable national and subnational tailored strategies to accelerate malaria elimination efforts. Here, we employed genome-wide association studies through pooled template sequencing to compare four eco-geographically different populations of the major vector, Anopheles funestus, across a South North transect in Cameroon, aiming to identify genomic signatures of adaptive responses to insecticides. ResultsOur analysis revealed limited population structure within Northern and Central regions (FST<0.02), suggesting extensive gene flow, while populations from the Littoral/Coastal region exhibited more distinct genetic patterns (FST>0.049). Greater genetic differentiation was observed at known resistance-associated loci, resistance-to-pyrethroids 1 (rp1) (2R chromosome) and CYP9 (X chromosome), with varying signatures of positive selection across populations. Allelic variation between variants underscores the pervasive impact of selection pressures, with rp1 variants more prevalent in Central and Northern populations (FST>0.3), and the CYP9 associated variants more pronounced in the Littoral/Coastal region (FST =0.29). Evidence of selective sweeps was supported by negative Tajima's D and reduced genetic diversity in all populations, particularly in Central (Elende) and Northern (Tibati) regions. Genomic variant analysis identified novel missense mutations and signatures of complex genomic alterations such as duplications, deletions, transposable element (TE) insertions, and chromosomal inversions, all associated with selective sweeps. A 4.3 kb TE insertion was fixed in all populations with Njombe Littoral/Coastal population, showing higher frequency of CYP9K1 (G454A), a known resistance allele and TE upstream compared to elsewhere. ConclusionOur study uncovered regional variations in insecticide resistance candidate variants, emphasizing the need for a streamlined DNA-based diagnostic assay for genomic surveillance across Africa. These findings will contribute to the development of tailored resistance management strategies crucial for addressing the dynamic challenges of malaria control in Cameroon.
Background Genomic architecture is a key evolutionary trait for living organisms. Due to multiple complex adaptive and neutral forces which impose evolutionary pressures on genomes, there is a huge variability of genomic features. However, their variability and the extent to which genomic content determines the distribution of recovered loci in reduced representation sequencing studies is largely unexplored.Results Here, by using 80 genome assemblies, we observed that whereas plants primarily increase their genome size by expanding their intergenic regions, animals expand both intergenic and intronic regions, although the expansion patterns differ between deuterostomes and protostomes. Loci mapping in introns, exons, and intergenic categories obtained by in silico digestion using 2b-enzymes are positively correlated with the percentage of these regions in the corresponding genomes, suggesting that loci distribution mostly mirrors genomic architecture of the selected taxon. However, exonic regions showed a significant enrichment of loci in all groups regardless of the used enzyme. Moreover, when using selective adaptors to obtain a secondarily reduced loci dataset, the percentage and distribution of retained loci also varied. Adaptors with G/C terminals recovered a lower percentage of selected loci, with a further enrichment of exonic regions, while adaptors with A/T terminals retained a higher percentage of loci and slightly selected more intronic regions than expected.Conclusions Our results highlight how genome composition, genome GC content, RAD enzyme choice and use of base-selective adaptors influence reduced genome representation techniques. This is important to acknowledge in population and conservation genomic studies, as it determines the abundance and distribution of loci.
Klebsiella pneumoniae is a common pathogen capable of causing a wide range of infections. Antibiotic resistance complicates treatment of these infections significantly. We are comparing resistance levels and genotypes among two collections of K. pneumoniae clinical isolates from Alexandria Main University Hospital (AMUH). We used disc diffusion and Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) by microbroth dilution to assess resistance levels and performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) to describe multilocus sequence types (MLST) and resistance gene presence. Among a collection of 56 K. pneumoniae clinical isolates (19 from 2019 to 37 from 2021), multidrug resistance (MDR) was 33% and 10%, extended drug resistance (XDR) was 24% and 46% and pan-drug resistance (PDR) was 43% and 43%, respectively. We identified 15 MLST STs including two novel types (ST-6118 and ST-6119 ). ST-101 and ST-383 were common between the two collections; ST-101 was the most common genotype in 2019 (28.6%) and ST-147 was most common in 2021 (25%). Ampicillin/sulbactam, amikacin, cefepime, ceftriaxone and ertapenem MICs were significantly higher in 2021. Prevalence of aph(3') - Ia, aph(3')-VI, mphA was significantly higher in 2021. The increasing resistance levels and the persistence of some MDR/XDR genotypes is concerning. Understanding mechanisms of resistance will inform infection control and antimicrobial stewardship plans to prevent evolution and spread of XDR and PDR strains.
The current investigation was undertaken to elucidate the population-stratifying and ancestry-informative markers in Indian, Chinese, and wild yak populations using whole genome resequencing (WGS) analysis while employing various selection strategies (Delta, Pairwise Wright's Fixation Index-FST, and Informativeness of Assignment) and marker densities (5-25 thousand). The study used WGS data on 105 individuals from three separate yak cohorts i.e., Indian yak (n = 29), Chinese yak (n = 61), and wild yak (n = 15). Variant calling in the GATK program with strict quality control resulted in 1,002,970 high-quality and independent (LD-pruned) SNP markers across the yak autosomes. Analysis was undertaken in toolbox for ranking and evaluation of SNPs (TRES) program wherein three different criteria i.e., Delta, Pairwise Wright's Fixation Index-FST, and Informativeness of Assignment were employed to identify population-stratifying and ancestry-informative markers across various datasets. The top-ranked 5,000 (5K), 10,000 (10K), 15,000 (15K), 20,000 (20K), and 25,000 (25K) SNPs were identified from each dataset while their composition and performance was assessed using different criteria. The average genomic breed clustering of Indian, Chinese, and wild yak cohorts with full density dataset (105 individuals with 1,002,970 markers) was 81.74%, 80.02%, and 83.62%, respectively. Informativeness of Assignment criterion with 10K density emerged as the best combination for three yak cohorts with 86.94%, 96.46%, and 98.20% clustering for Indian, Chinese, and wild yak, respectively. There was an average increase of 7.56%, 22.72%, and 30.35% in genomic breed clustering scores of Indian, Chinese, and wild yak cohorts over the estimates of the original dataset. The selected markers showed overlap multiple protein-coding genes within a 10 kb window including ADGRB3, ANK1, CACNG7, CALN1, CHCHD2, CREBBP, GLI3, KHDRBS2, and OSBPL10. This is the first report ever on elucidating low-density SNP marker sets with population-stratifying and ancestry-informative properties in three yak groups using WGS data. The results gain significance for application of genomic selection using cost-effective low-density SNP panels in global yak species.
Background Air exposure is an inevitable source of stress that leads to significant mortality in Coilia nasus. Our previous research demonstrated that adding 10 parts per thousand NaCl to aquatic water could enhance survival rates, albeit the molecular mechanisms involved in air exposure and salinity mitigation remained unclear. Conversely, salinity mitigation resulted in decreased plasma glucose levels and improved antioxidative activity. To shed light on this phenomenon, we characterized the transcriptomic changes in the C. nasus brain upon air exposure and salinity mitigation by integrated miRNA-mRNA analysis. Results The plasma glucose level was elevated during air exposure, whereas it decreased during salinity mitigation. Antioxidant activity was suppressed during air exposure, but was enhanced during salinity mitigation. A total of 629 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs) and 791 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were detected during air exposure, while 429 DEMs and 1016 DEGs were identified during salinity mitigation. GO analysis revealed that the target genes of DEMs and DEGs were enriched in biological process and cellular component during air exposure and salinity mitigation. KEGG analysis revealed that the target genes of DEMs and DEGs were enriched in metabolism. Integrated analysis showed that 24 and 36 predicted miRNA-mRNA regulatory pairs participating in regulating glucose metabolism, Ca2+ transport, inflammation, and oxidative stress. Interestingly, most of these miRNAs were novel miRNAs. Conclusion In this study, substantial miRNA-mRNA regulation pairs were predicted via integrated analysis of small RNA sequencing and RNA-Seq. Based on predicted miRNA-mRNA regulation and potential function of DEGs, miRNA-mRNA regulatory network involved in glucose metabolism and Ca2+ transport, inflammation, and oxidative stress in C. nasus brain during air exposure and salinity mitigation. They regulated the increased/decreased plasma glucose and inhibited/promoted antioxidant activity during air exposure and salinity mitigation. Our findings would propose novel insights to the mechanisms underlying fish responses to air exposure and salinity mitigation.
Background Schizothorax o'connori is an endemic fish distributed in the upper and lower reaches of the Yarlung Zangbo River in China. It has experienced a fourth round of whole gene replication events and is a good model for exploring the genetic differentiation and environmental adaptability of fish in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. The uplift of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau has led to changes in the river system, thereby affecting gene exchange and population differentiation between fish populations. With the release of fish whole genome data, whole genome resequencing has been widely used in genetic evolutionary analysis and screening of selected genes in fish, which can better elucidate the genetic basis and molecular environmental adaptation mechanisms of fish. Therefore, our purpose of this study was to understand the population structure and adaptive characteristics of S. o'connori using the whole-genome resequencing method. Results The results showed that 23,602,746 SNPs were identified from seven populations, mostly distributed on chromosomes 2 and 23. There was no significant genetic differentiation between the populations, and the genetic diversity was relatively low. However, the Zangga population could be separated from the Bomi, Linzhi, and Milin populations in the cluster analysis. Based on historical dynamics analysis of the population, the size of the ancestral population of S. o'connori was affected by the late accelerated uplift of the Qinghai Tibet Plateau and the Fourth Glacial Age. The selected sites were mostly enriched in pathways related to DNA repair and energy metabolism. Conclusion Overall, the whole-genome resequencing analysis provides valuable insights into the population structure and adaptive characteristics of S. o'connori. There was no obvious genetic differentiation at the genome level between the S. o'connori populations upstream and downstream of the Yarlung Zangbo River. The current distribution pattern and genetic diversity are influenced by the late accelerated uplift of the Qinghai Tibet Plateau and the Fourth Ice Age. The selected sites of S. o'connori are enriched in the energy metabolism and DNA repair pathways to adapt to the low temperature and strong ultraviolet radiation environment at high altitude.
Background Nuclear introns in Euglenida have been understudied. This study aimed to investigate nuclear introns in Euglenida by identifying a large number of introns in Euglena gracilis (E. gracilis), including cis-spliced conventional and nonconventional introns, as well as trans-spliced outrons. We also examined the sequence characteristics of these introns. Results A total of 28,337 introns and 11,921 outrons were identified. Conventional and nonconventional introns have distinct splice site features; the former harbour canonical GT/C-AG splice sites, whereas the latter are capable of forming structured motifs with their terminal sequences. We observed that short introns had a preference for canonical GT-AG introns. Notably, conventional introns and outrons in E. gracilis exhibited a distinct cytidine-rich polypyrimidine tract, in contrast to the thymidine-rich tracts observed in other organisms. Furthermore, the SL-RNAs in E. gracilis, as well as in other trans-splicing species, can form a recently discovered motif called the extended U6/5' ss duplex with the respective U6s. We also describe a novel type of alternative splicing pattern in E. gracilis. The tandem repeat sequences of introns in this protist were determined, and their contents were comparable to those in humans. Conclusions Our findings highlight the unique features of E. gracilis introns and provide insights into the splicing mechanism of these introns, as well as the genomics and evolution of Euglenida.
Background Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) is the most widely planted legume forage and one of the most economically valuable crops in the world. Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT), a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme, plays crucial roles in plant growth, development, and stress responses. To date, there has been no comprehensive bioinformatics investigation conducted on the SHMT genes in M. sativa. Results Here, we systematically analyzed the phylogenetic relationship, expansion pattern, gene structure, cis-acting elements, and expression profile of the MsSHMT family genes. The result showed that a total of 15 SHMT members were identified from the M. sativa genome database. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the MsSHMTs can be divided into 4 subgroups and conserved with other plant homologues. Gene structure analysis found that the exons of MsSHMTs ranges from 3 to 15. Analysis of cis-acting elements found that each of the MsSHMT genes contained different kinds of hormones and stress-related cis-acting elements in their promoter regions. Expression and function analysis revealed that MsSHMTs expressed in all plant tissues. qRT-PCR analysis showed that MsSHMTs induced by ABA, Salt, and drought stresses. Conclusions These results provided definite evidence that MsSHMTs might involve in growth, development and adversity responses in M. sativa, which laid a foundation for future functional studies of MsSHMTs.
BackgroundHuntington's disease (HD) is a hereditary neurological disorder caused by mutations in HTT, leading to neuronal degeneration. Traditionally, HD is associated with the misfolding and aggregation of mutant huntingtin due to an extended polyglutamine domain encoded by an expanded CAG tract. However, recent research has also highlighted the role of global transcriptional dysregulation in HD pathology. However, understanding the intricate relationship between mRNA expression and HD at the cellular level remains challenging. Our study aimed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of HD pathology using single-cell sequencing data.ResultsWe used single-cell RNA sequencing analysis to determine differential gene expression patterns between healthy and HD cells. HD cells were effectively modeled using a residual neural network (ResNet), which outperformed traditional and convolutional neural networks. Despite the efficacy of our approach, the F1 score for the test set was 96.53%. Using the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm, we identified genes influencing HD prediction and revealed their roles in HD pathobiology, such as in the regulation of cellular iron metabolism and mitochondrial function. SHAP analysis also revealed low-abundance genes that were overlooked by traditional differential expression analysis, emphasizing its effectiveness in identifying biologically relevant genes for distinguishing between healthy and HD cells. Overall, the integration of single-cell RNA sequencing data and deep learning models provides valuable insights into HD pathology.ConclusionWe developed the model capable of analyzing HD at single-cell transcriptomic level.
In this study, we investigated the codon bias of twelve mitochondrial core protein coding genes (PCGs) in eight Pleurotus strains, two of which are from the same species. The results revealed that the codons of all Pleurotus strains had a preference for ending in A/T. Furthermore, the correlation between codon base compositions and codon adaptation index (CAI), codon bias index (CBI) and frequency of optimal codons (FOP) indices was also detected, implying the influence of base composition on codon bias. The two P. ostreatus species were found to have differences in various base bias indicators. The average effective number of codons (ENC) of mitochondrial core PCGs of Pleurotus was found to be less than 35, indicating strong codon preference of mitochondrial core PCGs of Pleurotus. The neutrality plot analysis and PR2-Bias plot analysis further suggested that natural selection plays an important role in Pleurotus codon bias. Additionally, six to ten optimal codons (Delta RSCU > 0.08 and RSCU > 1) were identified in eight Pleurotus strains, with UGU and ACU being the most widely used optimal codons in Pleurotus. Finally, based on the combined mitochondrial sequence and RSCU value, the genetic relationship between different Pleurotus strains was deduced, showing large variations between them. This research has improved our understanding of synonymous codon usage characteristics and evolution of this important fungal group.
Background Spodoptera litura is a harmful pest that feeds on more than 80 species of plants, and can be infected and killed by Spodoptera litura nucleopolyhedrovirus (SpltNPV). SpltNPV-C3 is a type C SpltNPV clone, that was observed and collected in Japan. Compared with type A or type B SpltNPVs, SpltNPV-C3 can cause the rapid mortality of S. litura larvae. Methods In this study, occlusion bodies (OBs) and occlusion-derived viruses (ODVs) of SpltNPV-C3 were purified, and OBs were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). ODVs were observed under a transmission electron microscope (TEM). Results Both OBs and ODVs exhibit morphological characteristics typical of nucleopolyhedroviruses (NPVs).The genome of SpltNPV-C3 was sequenced and analyzed; the total length was 148,634 bp (GenBank accession 780,426,which was submitted as SpltNPV-II), with a G + C content of 45%. A total of 149 predicted ORFs were found. A phylogenetic tree of 90 baculoviruses was constructed based on core baculovirus genes. LC-MS/MS was used to analyze the proteins of SpltNPV-C3; 34 proteins were found in the purified ODVs, 15 of which were core proteins. The structure of the complexes formed by per os infectivity factors 1, 2, 3 and 4 (PIF-1, PIF-2, PIF-3 and PIF-4) was predicted with the help of the AlphaFold multimer tool and predicted conserved sequences in PIF-3. SpltNPV-C3 is a valuable species because of its virulence, and the analysis of its genome and proteins in this research will be beneficial for pest control efforts. Peer Review reports
Background Indian jointvetch (Aeschynomene indica) is a common and pernicious weed found in the upland direct-seeding rice fields in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River in China. However, there are few reports on the degree of harm, genetic characteristics, and management methods of this weed. The purpose of this study is to clarify the harm of Indian jointvetch to upland direct-seeding rice, analyze the genetic characteristics of this weed based on chloroplast genomics and identify its related species, and screen herbicides that are effective in managing this weed in upland direct-seeding rice fields. Results In a field investigation in upland direct-seeding rice paddies in Shanghai and Jiangsu, we determined that the plant height and maximum lateral distance of Indian jointvetch reached approximately 134.2 cm and 57.9 cm, respectively. With Indian jointvetch present at a density of 4/m(2) and 8/m(2), the yield of rice decreased by approximately 50% and 70%, respectively. We further obtained the first assembly of the complete chloroplast (cp.) genome sequence of Indian jointvetch (163,613 bp). There were 161 simple sequence repeats, 166 long repeats, and 83 protein-encoding genes. The phylogenetic tree and inverted repeat region expansion and contraction analysis based on cp. genomes demonstrated that species with closer affinity to A. indica included Glycine soja, Glycine max, and Sesbania cannabina. Moreover, a total of 3281, 3840, and 3838 single nucleotide polymorphisms were detected in the coding sequence regions of the cp. genomes of S. cannabina voucher IBSC, G. soja, and G. max compared with the A. indica sequence, respectively. A greenhouse pot experiment indicated that two pre-emergence herbicides, saflufenacil and oxyfluorfen, and two post-emergence herbicides, florpyrauxifen-benzyl and penoxsulam, can more effectively manage Indian jointvetch than other common herbicides in paddy fields. The combination of these two types of herbicides is recommended for managing Indian jointvetch throughout the entire growth period of upland direct-seeding rice. Conclusions This study provides molecular resources for future research focusing on the identification of the infrageneric taxa, phylogenetic resolution, and biodiversity of Leguminosae plants, along with recommendations for reliable management methods to control Indian jointvetch.
BackgroundIndigenous pig breeds in China have accumulated significant genetic diversity due to regional selection pressures. Investigating the selection signatures of these populations helps to understand their adaptive evolution and contributes to genetic improvement programs.ResultsWe collected whole-genome sequencing data from 133 individuals, including South China and North China indigenous pigs and Asian wild boars. After data filtering, we retained 31,521,978 high-quality SNPs. Population structure analysis using PCA revealed distinct genetic clustering among these populations. Selection signature detection identified 5,227 loci under selection in South China indigenous pigs and 5,800 in North China indigenous pigs compared to Asian wild boars. Candidate genes were enriched in immune response pathways, reproductive traits, and pigmentation pathways. South China indigenous pigs exhibited selection signals for fat deposition and immune responses, while North China indigenous pigs showed stronger signals related to growth, blood physiology, and reproductive performance. Additionally, key genes such as MC1R and KIT were associated with coat color variation, and IGF1R and IGF2R were linked to growth regulation.ConclusionOur results demonstrate that indigenous pigs in China have undergone selection for distinct traits aligned with their regional environments and farming systems. South China indigenous pigs have been selected for traits related to fat deposition and immunity, while North China indigenous pigs have been selected for growth and reproductive traits. The findings offer crucial insights into the genetic architecture of indigenous pig breeds, providing a valuable foundation for future genetic breeding programs.
Macrobrachium nipponense is a commercially important freshwater species of prawn that is widely distributed across Asian countries. In order to investigate the molecular mechanisms of growth in M. nipponense, and to provide a foundation for molecular breeding, we used genome-wide association analysis (GWAS) and transcriptomic analysis to screen polymorphisms and genes related to growth traits. We recorded the growth traits of 100 adult M. nipponense at the same growth stage, and each individual genotype was evaluated by whole genome resequencing. GWAS of growth traits detected 12 growth-related single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and eight growth-related genes from 49 chromosomes. Of the 100 individuals, we sampled muscle tissue from a total of 18 female and male M. nipponense exhibiting large differences in growth rate for RNA-seq. Transcriptome analysis revealed a total of 27,996 unigenes; of these, 33 and 60 differentially expressed genes were identified from males and females, respectively. Of these, 12 genes associated with energy metabolism and cytoskeletal pathways were identified as growth-related genes. Notably, genes from the actin family and the ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase 2 (UCH2) gene were identified by both GWAS and transcriptomic analysis. Two growth-related SNPs, S40_12327385 and S40_12327391, were found to be mapped to the ACTB gene. The ACTA1 gene, also from the actin family, was up-regulated in fast-growing males and females, while the ACT57B was down-regulated. In addition, the growth associated SNP S7_35313774 was located in the UCH2 gene; transcriptomics analysis revealed that the UCH2 gene was up-regulated in female individuals exhibiting high growth rates. Overall, our results provided a set of markers and candidate genes related to the growth of M. nipponense. These findings could facilitate the breeding management of this species and help us to further understand the genetic mechanisms of growth in crustaceans.
Background Expansion of genomic resources for the Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei), such as the construction of dense genetic linkage maps, is crucial for the application of genomic tools in order to improve economically relevant traits. Sexual dimorphism exists in Pacific white shrimp, and the mapping of the sex-determination region in this species may help in future reproductive applications. We have constructed male, female, and sex-averaged high-density genetic maps using a 50 K single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, followed by a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify genomic regions associated with sex in white shrimp. Results The genetic map yielded 15,256 SNPs assigned to 44 linkage groups (LG). The lengths of the male, female, and sex-averaged maps were 5,741.36, 5,461.20 and 5,525.26 cM, respectively. LG18 was found to be the largest for both sexes, whereas LG44 was the shortest for males and LG31 for females. A sex-determining region was found in LG31 with 21 statistically significant SNPs. The most important SNP was previously identified as a sex-linked marker and was able to identify 99% of the males and 88% of the females. Although other significant markers had a lower ability to determine sex, putative genes were intercepted or close to them. The oplophorus-luciferin 2-monooxygenase, serine/arginine repetitive matrix protein and spermine oxidase genes were identified as candidates with possible participation in important processes of sexual differentiation in shrimp. Conclusions Our results provide novel genomic resources for shrimp, including a high-density linkage map and new insights into the sex-determining region in L. vannamei, which may be usefulfor future genetics and reproduction applications.
Background Plant long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have important regulatory roles in responses to various biotic and abiotic stresses, including light quality. However, no lncRNAs have been specifically linked to the Shade Avoidance Response (SAS). Results To better understand the involvement of lncRNAs in shade avoidance, we examined RNA-seq libraries for lncRNAs with the potential to function in the neighbor proximity phenomenon in Arabidopsis thaliana (A. thaliana). Using transcriptomes generated from seedlings exposed to high and low red/far-red (R/FR) light conditions, we identified 13 lncRNA genes differentially expressed in cotyledons and 138 in hypocotyls. To infer possible functions for these lncRNAs, we used a 'guilt-by-association' approach to identify genes co-expressed with lncRNAs in a weighted gene co-expression network. Of 34 co-expression modules, 10 showed biological functions related to differential growth. We identified three potential lncRNAs co-regulated with genes related to SAS. T-DNA insertions in two of these lncRNAs were correlated with morphological differences in seedling responses to increased FR light, supporting our strategy for computational identification of lncRNAs involved in SAS. Conclusions Using a computational approach, we identified multiple lncRNAs in Arabidopsis involved in SAS. T-DNA insertions caused altered phenotypes under low R/FR light, suggesting functional roles in shade avoidance. Further experiments are needed to determine the specific mechanisms of these lncRNAs in SAS.
Background Ovine footrot caused by Dichelobacter nodosus (D. nodosus) is a contagious disease with serious economic and welfare impacts in sheep production systems worldwide. A better understanding of the host genetic architecture regarding footrot resistance/susceptibility is crucial to develop disease control strategies that efficiently reduce infection and its severity. A genome-wide association study was performed using a customized SNP array (47,779 SNPs in total) to identify genetic variants associated to footrot resistance/susceptibility in two Portuguese native breeds, i.e. Merino Branco and Merino Preto, and a population of crossbred animals. A cohort of 1375 sheep sampled across 17 flocks, located in the Alentejo region (southern Portugal), was included in the analyses.Results Phenotypes were scored from 0 (healthy) to 5 (severe footrot) based on visual inspection of feet lesions, following the Modified Egerton System. Using a linear mixed model approach, three SNPs located on chromosome 24 reached genome-wide significance after a Bonferroni correction (p < 0.05). Additionally, six genome-wide suggestive SNPs were identified each on chromosomes 2, 4, 7, 8, 9 and 15. The annotation and KEGG pathway analyses showed that these SNPs are located within regions of candidate genes such as the nonsense mediated mRNA decay associated PI3K related kinase (SMG1) (chromosome 24) and the RALY RNA binding protein like (RALYL) (chromosome 9), both involved in immunity, and the heparan sulfate proteoglycan 2 (HSPG2) (chromosome 2) and the Thrombospodin 1 (THBS1) (chromosome 7) implicated in tissue repair and wound healing processes.Conclusion This is the first attempt to identify molecular markers associated with footrot in Portuguese Merino sheep. These findings provide relevant information on a likely genetic association underlying footrot resistance/susceptibility and the potential candidate genes affecting this trait. Genetic selection strategies assisted on the information obtained from this study could enhance Merino sheep-breeding programs, in combination with farm management strategies, for a more effective and sustainable long-term solution for footrot control.
Background Nematodes are the most abundant and diverse metazoans on Earth, and are known to significantly affect ecosystem functioning. A better understanding of their biology and ecology, including potential adaptations to diverse habitats and lifestyles, is key to understanding their response to global change scenarios. Mitochondrial genomes offer high species level characterization, low cost of sequencing, and an ease of data handling that can provide insights into nematode evolutionary pressures.Results Generally, nematode mitochondrial genomes exhibited similar structural characteristics (e.g., gene size and GC content), but displayed remarkable variability around these general patterns. Compositional strand biases showed strong codon position specific G skews and relationships with nematode life traits (especially parasitic feeding habits) equal to or greater than with predicted phylogeny. On average, nematode mitochondrial genomes showed low non-synonymous substitution rates, but also high clade specific deviations from these means. Despite the presence of significant mutational saturation, non-synonymous (dN) and synonymous (dS) substitution rates could still be significantly explained by feeding habit and/or habitat. Low ratios of dN:dS rates, particularly associated with the parasitic lifestyles, suggested the presence of strong purifying selection.Conclusions Nematode mitochondrial genomes demonstrated a capacity to accumulate diversity in composition, structure, and content while still maintaining functional genes. Moreover, they demonstrated a capacity for rapid evolutionary change pointing to a potential interaction between multi-level selection pressures and rapid evolution. In conclusion, this study helps establish a background for our understanding of the potential evolutionary pressures shaping nematode mitochondrial genomes, while outlining likely routes of future inquiry.
Background Bacterial RNA polymerase holoenzyme requires sigma70 factors to start transcription by identifying promoter elements. Cyanobacteria possess multiple sigma70 factors to adapt to a wide variety of ecological niches. These factors are grouped into two categories: primary sigma factor initiates transcription of housekeeping genes during normal growth conditions, while alternative sigma factors initiate transcription of specific genes under particular conditions. However, the present classification does not consider the modular organization of their structural domains, introducing therefore multiple functional and structural biases. A comprehensive analysis of this protein family in cyanobacteria is needed to address these limitations.Results We investigated the structure and evolution of sigma70 factors in cyanobacteria, analyzing their modular architecture and variation among unicellular, filamentous, and heterocyst-forming morphotypes. 4,193 sigma70 homologs were found with 59 distinct modular patterns, including six essential and 29 accessory domains, such as DUF6596. 90% of cyanobacteria typically have 5 to 17 sigma70 homologs and this number likely depends on the strain morphotype, the taxonomic order and the genome size. We classified sigma70 factors into 12 clans and 36 families. According to taxonomic orders and phenotypic traits, the number of homologs within the 14 main families was variable, with the A.1 family including the primary sigma factor since this family was found in all cyanobacterial species. The A.1, A.5, C.1, E.1, J.1, and K.1 families were found to be key sigma families that distinguish heterocyst-forming strains. To explain the diversification and evolution of sigma70, we propose an evolutionary scenario rooted in the diversification of a common ancestor of the A1 family. This scenario is characterized by evolutionary events including domain losses, gains, insertions, and modifications. The high occurrence of the DUF6596 domain in bacterial sigma70 proteins, and its association with the highest prevalence observed in Actinobacteria, suggests that this domain might be important for sigma70 function. It also implies that the domain could have emerged in Actinobacteria and been transferred through horizontal gene transfer.Conclusion Our analysis provides detailed insights into the modular domain architecture of sigma70, introducing a novel robust classification. It also proposes an evolutionary scenario explaining their diversity across different taxonomical orders.
BackgroundNext-generation Sequencing (NGS) combined with bioinformatic analyses constitutes a powerful approach for identifying and characterizing previously unknown viral genomes. In this study, leaf samples from bitter apple plants (Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad) exhibiting symptoms such as dwarfing, leaf crinkling, and chlorosis were collected from the southern part of Kerman province, Iran.ResultsPutative infecting viruses were identified through de novo assembly of sequencing reads using various tools, followed by BLAST analysis. Complete genomes for Squash vein yellowing virus (SqVYV), Citrus-associated rhabdovirus (CiaRV), and a novel polerovirus-related strain termed Bitter apple aphid-borne yellows virus (BaABYV) were assembled and characterized. Additionally, a partial genome for Watermelon mosaic virus (WMV) was assembled. The genomic organization of the BaABYV was determined to be 5'-ORF0-ORF1-ORF1,2-ORF3a-ORF3-ORF3,5-ORF4-3'. Amino acid sequence identities for inferred proteins (P0 and P1, P1,2) with known poleroviruses were found to be the 90% species delineation limit, implying that BaABYV should be considered a new member of the genus Polerovirus. Recombination events were observed in the BaABYV and WMV strains; such events were not found in the CiaRV strain.ConclusionsMolecular evidence from this study suggests that C. colocynthis is a reservoir host of several plant viruses. Among them, BaABYV is proposed as a new member of the genus Polerovirus. Furthermore, the CiaRV strain has been reported for the first time from Iran.
BackgroundGenomic heterozygosity has been shown to confer a health advantage in humans and play a protective role in complex diseases. Given osteoarthritis (OA) is a highly polygenic disease, we set out to determine if an association exists between OA and genomic heterozygosity.ResultsEnd-stage knee and hip OA patients and healthy controls were recruited from the Newfoundland and Labrador (NL) population. The Arthritis Research UK Osteoarthritis Genetics (arcOGEN) consortium database was utilized as a replication cohort. DNA was extracted from blood samples and genotyped. Individual rates of observed heterozygosity (HetRate) and heterozygosity excess (HetExcess) relative to the expected were mathematically derived, and standardized to a z-score. Logistic regression modeling was used to examine the association between OA and HetRate or HetExcess. A total of 559 knee and hip OA patients (mean age 66.5 years, body mass index (BMI) 33.7 kg/m2, and 55% females) and 118 healthy controls (mean age 56.4 years, BMI 29.5 kg/m2, and 59% female) were included in the NL cohort analysis. We found that OA had an inverse relationship with HetRate and HetExcess with odds ratios of 0.64 (95% CI: 0.45-0.91) and 0.65 (95% CI: 0.45-0.93) per standard deviation (SD), respectively. The arcOGEN data included 2,019 end-stage knee and hip OA patients and 2,029 healthy controls, validating our findings with HetRate and HetExcess odds ratios of 0.60 (95% CI: 0.56-0.64) and 0.44 (95% CI: 0.40-0.47) per SD, respectively.ConclusionsOur results are the first to clearly show evidence, from two separate cohorts, that reduced genomic heterozygosity confers a risk for the future development of OA.
The sacred datura plant (Solanales: Solanaceae: Datura wrightii) has been used to study plant-herbivore interactions for decades. The wealth of information that has resulted leads it to have potential as a model system for studying the ecological and evolutionary genomics of these interactions. We present a de novo Datura wrightii genome assembled using PacBio HiFi long-reads. Our assembly is highly complete and contiguous (N50 = 179Mb, BUSCO Complete = 97.6%). We successfully detected a previously documented ancient whole genome duplication using our assembly and have classified the gene duplication history that generated its coding sequence content. We use it as the basis for a genome-guided differential expression analysis to identify the induced responses of this plant to one of its specialized herbivores (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae: Lema daturaphila). We find over 3000 differentially expressed genes associated with herbivory and that elevated expression levels of over 200 genes last for several days. We also combined our analyses to determine the role that different gene duplication categories have played in the evolution of Datura-herbivore interactions. We find that tandem duplications have expanded multiple functional groups of herbivore responsive genes with defensive functions, including UGT-glycosyltranserases, oxidoreductase enzymes, and peptidase inhibitors. Overall, our results expand our knowledge of herbivore-induced plant transcriptional responses and the evolutionary history of the underlying herbivore-response genes.
Fusarium, a member of the Ascomycota fungi, encompasses several pathogenic species significant to plants and animals. Some phytopathogenic species have received special attention due to their negative economic impact on the agricultural industry around the world. Traditionally, identification and taxonomic analysis of Fusarium have relied on morphological and phenotypic features, including the fungal host, leading to taxonomic conflicts that have been solved using molecular systematic technologies. In this work, we applied a phylogenomic approach that allowed us to resolve the evolutionary history of the species complexes of the genus and present evidence that supports the F. ventricosum species complex as the most basal lineage of the genus. Additionally, we present evidence that proposes modifications to the previous hypothesis of the evolutionary history of the F. staphyleae, F. newnesense, F. nisikadoi, F. oxysporum, and F. fujikuroi species complexes. Evolutionary analysis showed that the genome GC content tends to be lower in more modern lineages, in both, the whole-genome and core-genome coding DNA sequences. In contrast, genome size gain and losses are present during the evolution of the genus. Interestingly, core genome duplication events positively correlate with genome size. Evolutionary and genome conservation analysis supports the F3 hypothesis of Fusarium as a more compact and conserved group in terms of genome conservation. By contrast, outside of the F3 hypothesis, the most basal clades only share 8.8% of its genomic sequences with the F3 clade.
BackgroundThe expression of biological traits is modulated by genetics as well as the environment, and the level of influence exerted by the latter may vary across characteristics. Photosynthetic traits in plants are complex quantitative traits that are regulated by both endogenous genetic factors and external environmental factors such as light intensity and CO2 concentration. The specific processes impacted occur dynamically and continuously as the growth of plants changes. Although studies have been conducted to explore the genetic regulatory mechanisms of individual photosynthetic traits or to evaluate the effects of certain environmental variables on photosynthetic traits, the systematic impact of environmental variables on the dynamic process of integrated plant growth and development has not been fully elucidated.ResultsIn this paper, we proposed a research framework to investigate the genetic mechanism of high-dimensional complex photosynthetic traits in response to the light environment at the genome level. We established a set of high-dimensional equations incorporating environmental regulators to integrate functional mapping and dynamic screening of gene-environment complex systems to elucidate the process and pattern of intrinsic genetic regulatory mechanisms of three types of photosynthetic phenotypes of Populus simonii that varied with light intensity. Furthermore, a network structure was established to elucidate the crosstalk among significant QTLs that regulate photosynthetic phenotypic systems. Additionally, the detection of key QTLs governing the response of multiple phenotypes to the light environment, coupled with the intrinsic differences in genotype expression, provides valuable insights into the regulatory mechanisms that drive the transition of photosynthetic activity and photoprotection in the face of varying light intensity gradients.ConclusionsThis paper offers a comprehensive approach to unraveling the genetic architecture of multidimensional variations in photosynthetic phenotypes, considering the combined impact of integrated environmental factors from multiple perspectives.
Background Purple flowering stalk (Brassica rapa var. purpuraria) is a widely cultivated plant with high nutritional and medicinal value and exhibiting strong adaptability during growing. Mitochondrial (mt) play important role in plant cells for energy production, developing with an independent genetic system. Therefore, it is meaningful to assemble and annotate the functions for the mt genome of plants independently. Though there have been several reports referring the mt genome of in Brassica species, the genome of mt in B. rapa var. purpuraria and its functional gene variations when compared to its closely related species has not yet been addressed. Results The mt genome of B. rapa var. purpuraria was assembled through the Illumina and Nanopore sequencing platforms, which revealed a length of 219,775 bp with a typical circular structure. The base composition of the whole B. rapa var. purpuraria mt genome revealed A (27.45%), T (27.31%), C (22.91%), and G (22.32%). 59 functional genes, composing of 33 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 23 tRNA genes, and 3 rRNA genes, were annotated. The sequence repeats, codon usage, RNA editing, nucleotide diversity and gene transfer between the cp genome and mt genome were examined in the B. rapa var. purpuraria mt genome. Phylogenetic analysis show that B. rapa var. Purpuraria was closely related to B. rapa subsp. Oleifera and B. juncea. Ka/Ks analysis reflected that most of the PCGs in the B. rapa var. Purpuraria were negatively selected, illustrating that those mt genes were conserved during evolution. Conclusions The results of our findings provide valuable information on the B.rapa var. Purpuraria genome, which might facilitate molecular breeding, genetic variation and evolutionary researches for Brassica species in the future.
Background Cladocopium infistulum (Symbiodiniaceae) is a dinoflagellate specialized to live in symbiosis with western Pacific giant clams (Tridacnidae). Unlike coral-associated symbionts, which reside within the host cells, C. infistulum inhabits the extracellular spaces of the clam's digestive diverticula. It is phylogenetically basal to a large species complex of stress-tolerant Cladocopium, many of which are associated with important reef-building corals in the genus Porites. This close phylogenetic relationship may explain why C. infistulum exhibits high thermotolerance relative to other tridacnid symbionts. Moreover, past analyses of microsatellite loci indicated that Cladocopium underwent whole-genome duplication prior to the adaptive radiations that led to its present diversity. Results A draft genome assembly of C. infistulum was produced using long- and short-read sequences to explore the genomic basis for adaptations underlying thermotolerance and extracellular symbiosis among dinoflagellates and to look for evidence of genome duplication. Comparison to three other Cladocopium genomes revealed no obvious over-representation of gene groups or families whose functions would be important for maintaining C. infistulum's unique physiological and ecological properties. Preliminary analyses support the existence of partial or whole-genome duplication among Cladocopium, but additional high-quality genomes are required to substantiate these findings. Conclusion Although this investigation of Cladocopium infistulum revealed no patterns diagnostic of heat tolerance or extracellular symbiosis in terms of overrepresentation of gene functions or genes under selection, it provided a valuable genomic resource for comparative analyses. It also indicates that ecological divergence among Cladocopium species, and potentially among other dinoflagellates, is partially governed by mechanisms other than gene content. Thus, additional high-quality, multiomic data are needed to explore the molecular basis of key phenotypes among symbiotic microalgae.
BackgroundTwo strains of the endoparasitoid Cotesia typhae (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) present a differential parasitism success on the host, Sesamia nonagrioides (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). One is virulent on both permissive and resistant host populations, and the other only on the permissive host. This interaction provides a very interesting frame for studying virulence factors. Here, we used a combination of comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses to unravel the molecular basis underlying virulence differences between the strains. ResultsFirst, we report that virulence genes are mostly expressed during the pupal stage 24 h before adult emergence of the parasitoid. Especially, 55 proviral genes are up-regulated at this stage, while their expression is only expected in the host. Parasitoid gene expression in the host increases from 24 to 96 h post-parasitism, revealing the expression of 54 proviral genes at early parasitism stage and the active participation of teratocytes to the parasitism success at the late stage. Secondly, comparison between strains reveals differences in venom composition, with 12 proteins showing differential abundance. Proviral expression in the host displays a strong temporal variability, along with differential patterns between strains. Notably, a subset of proviral genes including protein-tyrosine phosphatases is specifically over-expressed in the resistant host parasitized by the less virulent strain, 24 h after parasitism. This result particularly hints at host modulation of proviral expression. Combining proteomic and transcriptomic data at various stages, we identified 8 candidate genes to support the difference in reproductive success of the two strains, one proviral and 7 venom genes, one of them being also produced within the host by the teratocytes. ConclusionsThis study sheds light on the temporal expression of virulence factors of Cotesia typhae, both in the host and in the parasitoid. It also identifies potential molecular candidates driving differences in parasitism success between two strains. Together, those findings provide a path for further exploration of virulence mechanisms in parasitoid wasps, and offer insights into host-parasitoid coevolution.
Background To identify the underlying genetic defects in autosomal dominant (ADCC) and autosomal recessive (ARCC) congenital cataract families from North India.Methods Detailed family histories were collected, pedigrees drawn followed by slit-lamp examination and lens photography. Mutation screening was performed using Sanger sequencing in the known candidate genes for crystallins, connexins, and membrane proteins. The pathogenicity of identified variants was assessed bioinformatically.Results In two ADCC families (CC-281 and CC-3015) with posterior lenticonus cataract, a novel change c.263C > T (p.P88L) in GJA3 in CC-281 family and a previously reported substitution c.388C > T (p.R130C) in LIM2 in CC-3015 family was observed. In an ARCC family (CC-3005) having central pulverulent cataract, a novel frameshift deletion (c.764delT;p.L255R46fs) in GJA3 was detected. The observed variants segregated completely with phenotypes in the affected members and were neither present in unaffected family members nor in the ethnically matched 150 controls (tested for two novel variants), hence excluding these as polymorphisms.Conclusions Present study identified two novel mutations i.e., c.263C > T;p.P88L and c.764delT;p.L255R46fs in GJA3 in an ADCC and an ARCC family having posterior lenticonus and central pulverulent cataract, respectively. In another ADCC family with posterior lenticonus cataract, a previously reported mutation c.388C > T;p.R130C in LIM2 was observed. R130 may be a mutation hotspot as previously ADCC families from different ethnicities (UK/Czechia, China, Spain, Japan) also harbored the same substitution, however, with different phenotypes i.e., nuclear pulverulent, membranous, nuclear, lamellar, and sutural/lamellar. Findings in present study thus expand the mutation spectrum and phenotypic heterogeneity linked with GJA3 and LIM2.
Background The increase in temperatures due to the current climate change dramatically affects crop cultivation, resulting in yield losses and altered fruit quality. Tomato is one of the most extensively grown and consumed horticultural products, and although it can withstand a wide range of climatic conditions, heat stress can affect plant growth and development specially on the reproductive stage, severely influencing the final yield. In the present work, the heat stress response mechanisms of one thermotolerant genotype (E42) were investigated by exploring its regulatory gene network. This was achieved through a promoter analysis based on the identification of the heat stress elements (HSEs) mapping in the promoters, combined with a gene co-expression network analysis aimed at identifying interactions among heat-related genes. Results Results highlighted 82 genes presenting HSEs in the promoter and belonging to one of the 52 gene networks obtained by the GCN analysis; 61 of these also interact with heat shock factors (Hsfs). Finally, a list of 13 candidate genes including two Hsfs, nine heat shock proteins (Hsps) and two GDSL esterase/lipase (GELPs) were retrieved by focusing on those E42 genes exhibiting HSEs in the promoters, interacting with Hsfs and showing variants, compared to Heinz reference genome, with HIGH and/or MODERATE impact on the translated protein. Among these, the Gene Ontology annotation analysis evidenced that only LeHsp100 (Solyc02g088610) belongs to a network specifically involved in the response to heat stress. Conclusions As a whole, the combination of bioinformatic analyses carried out on genomic and trascriptomic data available for tomato, together with polymorphisms detected in HS-related genes of the thermotolerant E42 allowed to determine a subset of candidate genes involved in the HS response in tomato. This study provides a novel approach in the investigation of abiotic stress response mechanisms and further studies will be conducted to validate the role of the highlighted genes.
BackgroundAutistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic component and high heterogeneity. Essential ASD refers to patients who do not have other comorbidities. This study aimed to investigate the genetic basis of essential ASD using whole exome sequencing (WES) and array-comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH).ResultsIn a cohort of 122 children with essential ASD, WES detected 382 variants across 223 genes, while array-CGH identified 46 copy number variants (CNVs). The combined use of WES and array-CGH revealed pathogenic variants in four patients (3.1% detection rate) and likely pathogenic variants in 34 patients (27.8% detection rate). Only one patient had a pathogenic CNV (0.8% detection rate). Including likely pathogenic variants, the overall detection rate was 31.2%. Additionally, 33 de novo heterozygous sequence variants were identified by WES, with three classified as pathogenic and 13 as likely pathogenic. Sequence variants were found in 85 genes already associated with ASD, and 138 genes not previously included in the SFARI dataset were identified as potential new candidate genes.ConclusionsThe study enhances genetic understanding of essential ASD and identifies new candidate genes of interest. The findings suggest that using both array-CGH and WES in patients with essential ASD can improve the detection of pathogenic and likely pathogenic genetic variants, contributing to better diagnosis and potentially guiding future research and treatment strategies.
BackgroundStructural variants (SVs) such as deletions, duplications, and insertions are known to contribute to phenotypic variation but remain challenging to identify and genotype. A more complete, accessible, and assessable collection of SVs will assist efforts to study SV function in cattle and to incorporate SV genotyping into animal evaluation.ResultsIn this work we produced a large and deeply characterized collection of SVs in Holstein cattle using two popular SV callers (Manta and Smoove) and publicly available Illumina whole-genome sequence (WGS) read sets from 310 samples (290 male, 20 female, mean 20X coverage). Manta and Smoove identified 31 K and 68 K SVs, respectively. In total the SVs cover 5% (Manta) and 6% (Smoove) of the reference genome, in contrast to the 1% impacted by SNPs and indels. SV genotypes from each caller were confirmed to accurately recapitulate animal relationships estimated using WGS SNP genotypes from the same dataset, with Manta genotypes outperforming Smoove, and deletions outperforming duplications. To support efforts to link the SVs to phenotypic variation, overlapping and tag SNPs were identified for each SV, using genotype sets extracted from the WGS results corresponding to two bovine SNP chips (BovineSNP50 and BovineHD). 9% (Manta) and 11% (Smoove) of the SVs were found to have overlapping BovineHD panel SNPs, while 21% (Manta) and 9% (Smoove) have BovineHD panel tag SNPs. A custom interactive database (https://svdb-dc.pslab.ca) containing the identified sequence variants with extensive annotations, gene feature information, and BAM file content for all SVs was created to enable the evaluation and prioritization of SVs for further study. Illustrative examples involving the genes POPDC3, ORM1, G2E3, FANCI, TFB1M, FOXC2, N4BP2, GSTA3, and COPA show how this resource can be used to find well-supported genic SVs, determine SV breakpoints, design genotyping approaches, and identify processed pseudogenes masquerading as deletions.ConclusionsThe resources developed through this study can be used to explore sequence variation in Holstein cattle and to develop strategies for studying SVs of interest. The lack of overlapping and tag SNPs from commonly used SNP chips for most of the SVs suggests that other genotyping approaches will be needed (for example direct genotyping) to understand their potential contributions to phenotype. The included SV genotype assessments point to challenges in characterizing SVs, especially duplications, using short-read data and support ongoing efforts to better characterize cattle genomes through long-read sequencing. Lastly, the identification of previously known functional SVs and additional CDS-overlapping SVs supports the phenotypic relevance of this dataset.
Background The hard clam (Mercenaria mercenaria), a marine bivalve distributed along the U.S. eastern seaboard, supports a significant shellfish industry. Overharvest in the 1970s and 1980s led to a reduction in landings. While the transition of industry from wild harvest to aquaculture since that time has enhanced production, it has also exacerbated challenges such as disease outbreaks. In this study, we developed and validated a 66K SNP array designed to advance genetic studies and improve breeding programs in the hard clam, focusing particularly on the development of markers that could be useful in understanding disease resistance and environmental adaptability. Results Whole-genome resequencing of 84 individual clam samples and 277 pooled clam libraries yielded over 305 million SNPs, which were filtered down to a set of 370,456 SNPs that were used as input for the design of a 66K SNP array. This medium-density array features 66,543 probes targeting coding and non-coding regions, including 70 mitochondrial SNPs, to capture the extensive genetic diversity within the species. The SNPs were distributed evenly throughout the clam genome, with an average interval of 25,641 bp between SNPs. The array incorporates markers for detecting the clam pathogen Mucochytrium quahogii (formerly QPX), enhancing its utility in disease management. Performance evaluation on 1,904 samples demonstrated a 72.7% pass rate with stringent quality control. Concordance testing affirmed the array's repeatability, with an average agreement of allele calls of 99.64% across multiple tissue types, highlighting its reliability. The tissue-specific analysis demonstrated that some tissue types yield better genotyping results than others. Importantly, the array, including its embedded mitochondrial markers, effectively elucidated complex genetic relationships across different clam groups, both wild populations and aquacultured stocks, showcasing its utility for detailed population genetics studies. Conclusions The 66K SNP array is a powerful and robust genotyping tool that offers unprecedented insights into the species' genomic architecture and population dynamics and that can greatly facilitate hard clam selective breeding. It represents an important resource that has the potential to transform clam aquaculture, thereby promoting industry sustainability and ecological and economic resilience.
BackgroundIn the domain of forensic science, the application of kinship identification and mixture deconvolution techniques are of critical importance, providing robust scientific evidence for the resolution of complex cases. Microhaplotypes, as the emerging class of genetic markers, have been widely studied in forensics due to their high polymorphisms and excellent stability.Results and discussionIn this research, a novel and high-efficient panel integrating 33 microhaplotype loci along with a sex-determining locus was developed by the next generation sequencing technology. In addition, we also assessed its forensic utility and delved into its capacity for kinship analysis and mixture deconvolution. The average effective number of alleles (Ae) of the 33 microhaplotype loci in the Guizhou Han population was 6.06, and the Ae values of 30 loci were greater than 5. The cumulative power of discrimination and cumulative power of exclusion values of the novel panel in the Guizhou Han population were 1-5.6 x 10- 43 and 1-1.6 x 10- 15, respectively. In the simulated kinship analysis, the panel could effectively distinguish between parent-child, full-sibling, half-sibling, grandfather-grandson, aunt-nephew and unrelated individuals, but uncertainty rates clearly increased when distinguishing between first cousins and unrelated individuals. For the mixtures, the novel panel had demonstrated excellent performance in estimating the number of contributors of mixtures with 1 to 5 contributors in combination with the machine learning methods.ConclusionsIn summary, we have developed a small and high-efficient panel for forensic genetics, which could provide novel insights into forensic complex kinships testing and mixture deconvolution.
Background Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) are a family of enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of aldehyde molecules into the corresponding carboxylic acid, regulate the balance of aldehydes and protect plants from the poisoning caused by excessive accumulation of aldehydes; however, this gene family has rarely been studied in cotton.Results In the present study, genome-wide identification was performed, and a total of 114 ALDH family members were found in three cotton species, Gossypium hirsutum, Gossypium arboreum and Gossypium raimondii. The ALDH genes were divided into six subgroups by evolutionary analysis. ALDH genes in the same subgroup showed similar gene structures and conserved motifs, but some genes showed significant differences, which may result in functional differences. Chromosomal location analysis and selective pressure analysis revealed that the ALDH gene family had experienced many fragment duplication events. Cis-acting element analysis revealed that this gene family may be involved in the response to various biotic and abiotic stresses. The RT-qPCR results showed that the expression levels of some members of this gene family were significantly increased under salt stress conditions. Gohir.A11G040800 and Gohir.D06G046200 were subjected to virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) experiments, and the sensitivity of the silenced plants to salt stress was significantly greater than that of the negative control plants, suggesting that Gohir.A11G040800 and Gohir.D06G046200 may be involved in the response of cotton to salt stress.Conclusions In total, 114 ALDH genes were identified in three Gossypium species by a series of bioinformatics analysis. Gene silencing of the ALDH genes of G. hirsutum revealed that ALDH plays an important role in the response of cotton to salt stress.
Because number of matured muscle fibers in poultry does not increase after birth, the meat yield is mainly determined during embryogenesis. We previously indicated breast muscle grew rapidly from 18th day after hatching (E18) to E27, and almost stopped from E27 to E34 of Jiaji ducks, while the mechanism is unclear. This study utilized RNA-seq to explore the related genes of muscle development and their relationship with small molecule metabolites at E18, E27 and E34 of Jiaji ducks. Several thousand differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were detected among E18, E27 and E34. DEGs expression profiles included 8 trend maps, among which trend 1 was opposite to and trend 6 was consistent with breast muscle development trend of Jiaji ducks. Through joint analysis between trend 1 of DEGs and trend 1 of differential metabolites (DEMs), protein digestion and absorption pathway stood out. The decrease of COL8A2 gene expression will lead to the decrease of arginine content, which will inhibit the development of breast muscle in embryonic Jiaji duck. Similarly, joint analysis between trend 6 of DEGs and trend 6 of DEMs indicated the increase of GAMT gene expression will cause the increase of proline content, and then promote the development of breast muscle of Jiaji duck in embryonic period. These results will be helpful for further understanding the mechanism of muscle yields of Jiaji ducks.
BackgroundThe stria vascularis (SV), located in the lateral wall of the cochlea, maintains cochlear fluid homeostasis and mechanoelectrical transduction (MET) activity required for sound wave conduction. The pathogenesis of a number of human inheritable deafness syndromes, age related hearing loss, drug-induced ototoxicity and noise-induced hearing loss results from the morphological changes and functional impairments in the development of the SV. In this study, we investigate the implications of intercellular communication within the SV in the pathogenesis of sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). We aim to identify commonly regulated signaling pathways using publicly available single-cell transcriptomic sequencing (scRNA-seq) datasets.MethodsWe analyzed scRNA-seq data, which was derived from studying the cochlear SV in mice with SNHL compared to normal adult mice. After quality control and filtering, we obtained the major cellular components of the mouse cochlear SV and integrated the data. Using Seurat's FindAllMarkers and FindMarkers packages, we searched for novel conservative genes and differential genes. We employed KEGG and GSEA to identify molecular pathways that are commonly altered among different types of SNHL. We utilized pySCENIC to discover new specific regulatory factors in SV subpopulation cells. With the help of CellChat, we identified changes in subpopulation cells showing similar trends across different SNHL types and their alterations in intercellular communication pathways.ResultsThrough the analysis of the integrated data, we discovered new conserved genes to SV specific cells and identified common downregulated pathways in three types of SNHL. The enriched genes for these pathways showing similar trends are primarily associated with the Electron Transport Chain, related to mitochondrial energy metabolism. Using the CellChat package, we further found that there are shared pathways in the incoming signaling of specific intermediate cells in SNHL, and these pathways have common upstream regulatory transcription factor of Nfe2l2. Combining the results from pySCENIC and CellChat, we predicted the transcription factor Nfe2l2 as an upstream regulatory factor for multiple shared cellular pathways in IC. Additionally, it serves as an upstream factor for several genes within the Electron Transport Chain.ConclusionOur bioinformatics analysis has revealed that downregulation of the mitochondrial electron transport chain have been observed in various conditions of SNHL. E2f1, Esrrb, Runx1, Yy1, and Gata2 could serve as novel important common TFs regulating the electron transport chain. Adm has emerged as a potential new marker gene for intermediate cells, while Itgb5 and Tesc show promise as potential new marker genes for marginal cells in the SV. These findings offer a new perspective on SV lesions in SNHL and provide additional theoretical evidence for the same drug treatment and prevention of different pathologies of SNHL.
Background While the size of chloroplast genomes (cpDNAs) is often influenced by the expansion and contraction of inverted repeat regions and the enrichment of repeats, it is the intergenic spacers (IGSs) that appear to play a pivotal role in determining the size of Pteridaceae cpDNAs. This provides an opportunity to delve into the evolution of chloroplast genomic structures of the Pteridaceae family. This study added five Pteridaceae species, comparing them with 36 published counterparts.Results Poor alignment in the non-coding regions of the Pteridaceae family was observed, and this was attributed to the widespread presence of overlong IGSs in Pteridaceae cpDNAs. These overlong IGSs were identified as a major factor influencing variations in cpDNA size. In comparison to non-expanded IGSs, overlong IGSs exhibited significantly higher GC content and were rich in repetitive sequences. Species divergence time estimations suggest that these overlong IGSs may have already existed during the early radiation of the Pteridaceae family.Conclusions This study reveals new insights into the genetic variation, evolutionary history, and dynamic changes in the cpDNA structure of the Pteridaceae family, providing a fundamental resource for further exploring its evolutionary research.
Background Bio-ontologies are keys in structuring complex biological information for effective data integration and knowledge representation. Semantic similarity analysis on bio-ontologies quantitatively assesses the degree of similarity between biological concepts based on the semantics encoded in ontologies. It plays an important role in structured and meaningful interpretations and integration of complex data from multiple biological domains. Results We present simona, a novel R package for semantic similarity analysis on general bio-ontologies. Simona implements infrastructures for ontology analysis by offering efficient data structures, fast ontology traversal methods, and elegant visualizations. Moreover, it provides a robust toolbox supporting over 70 methods for semantic similarity analysis. With simona, we conducted a benchmark against current semantic similarity methods. The results demonstrate methods are clustered based on their mathematical methodologies, thus guiding researchers in the selection of appropriate methods. Additionally, we explored annotation-based versus topology-based methods, revealing that semantic similarities solely based on ontology topology can efficiently reveal semantic similarity structures, facilitating analysis on less-studied organisms and other ontologies. Conclusions Simona offers a versatile interface and efficient implementation for processing, visualization, and semantic similarity analysis on bio-ontologies. We believe that simona will serve as a robust tool for uncovering relationships and enhancing the interoperability of biological knowledge systems.
Background Autophagy is a conserved catabolic process in eukaryotes that contributes to cell survival in response to multiple stresses and is important for organism fitness. Extensive research has shown that autophagy plays a pivotal role in both viral infection and replication processes. Despite the increasing research dedicated to autophagy, investigations into shrimp autophagy are relatively scarce. Results Based on three different methods, a total of 20 members of the ATGs were identified from F. chinensis, all of which contained an autophagy domain. These genes were divided into 18 subfamilies based on their different C-terminal domains, and were found to be located on 16 chromosomes. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) results showed that ATG genes were extensively distributed in all the tested tissues, with the highest expression levels were detected in muscle and eyestalk. To clarify the comprehensive roles of ATG genes upon biotic and abiotic stresses, we examined their expression patterns. The expression levels of multiple ATGs showed an initial increase followed by a decrease, with the highest expression levels observed at 6 h and/or 24 h after WSSV injection. The expression levels of three genes (ATG1, ATG3, and ATG4B) gradually increased until 60 h after injection. Under low-salt conditions, 12 ATG genes were significantly induced, and their transcription abundance peaked at 96 h after treatment. Conclusions These results suggested that ATG genes may have significant roles in responding to various environmental stressors. Overall, this study provides a thorough characterization and expression analysis of ATG genes in F. chinensis, laying a strong foundation for further functional studies and promising potential in innate immunity.
Background The cellular origin of hypopharyngeal diseases is crucial for further diagnosis and treatment, and the microenvironment in tissues may also be associated with specific cell types at the same time. Normal adjacent tissues (NATs) of hypopharyngeal carcinoma differ from non-tumor-bearing tissues, and can influenced by the tumor. However, the heterogeneity in kinds of disease samples remains little known, and the transcriptomic profile about biological information associated with disease occurrence and clinical outcome contained in it has yet to be fully evaluated. For these reasons, we should quickly investigate the taxonomic and transcriptomic information of NATs in human hypopharynx.Results Single-cell suspensions of normal adjacent tissues (NATs) of hypopharyngeal carcinoma were obtained and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was performed. We present scRNA-seq data from 39,315 high-quality cells in the hypopharyngeal from five human donors, nine clusters of normal adjacent human hypopharyngeal cells were presented, including epithelial cells, endothelial cells (ECs), mononuclear phagocyte system cells (MPs), fibroblasts, T cells, plasma cells, B cells, mural cells and mast cells. Nonimmune components in the microenvironment, including epithelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts and the subpopulations of them were performed.Conclusions Our data provide a solid basis for the study of single-cell landscape in human normal adjacent hypopharyngeal tissues biology and related diseases.
BackgroundGuinea pigs exhibit numerous physiological similarities to humans, yet the details of their preimplantation embryonic development remain largely unexplored.ResultsTo address this, we conducted single-cell sequencing on the transcriptomes of cells isolated from the zygote stage through preimplantation stages in guinea pigs. This study identified seven distinct cell types within guinea pig preimplantation embryos and pinpointed the timing of zygotic gene activation (ZGA). Trajectory analysis revealed a bifurcation into two lineage-specific branches, accompanied by alterations in specific pathways, including oxidative phosphorylation and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Additionally, co-expressed gene network analysis highlighted the most enriched functional modules for the epiblast (EPI), primitive endoderm (PrE), and inner cell mass (ICM). Finally, we compared the similarities and differences between human and guinea pig epiblasts (EPIs).ConclusionThis study systematically constructs a cell atlas of guinea pig preimplantation embryonic development, offering fresh insights into mammalian embryonic development and providing alternative experimental models for studying human embryonic development.
BackgroundPowdery mildew is a devastating fungal disease that poses a significant threat to wheat yield and quality worldwide. Identifying resistance genes is highly advantageous for the molecular breeding of resistant cultivars. GRAS proteins are important transcription factors that regulate plant development and stress responses. Nonetheless, their roles in wheat-pathogen interactions remain poorly understood.ResultsIn this study, we used bioinformatics tools to identify and analyze wheat GRAS family genes responsive to biotic stresses and elucidated the function of TaeSCL6 within this family. A total of 179 GRAS genes in wheat were unevenly distributed on 7 chromosomes, and classified into 12 subfamilies based on phylogenetic relationship analysis. Gene duplication analysis revealed 13 pairs of tandem repeats and 142 pairs of segmental duplications, which may account for the rapid expansion of the wheat GRAS family. Expression pattern analysis revealed that 75% of the expressed TaeGRAS genes are responsive to biotic stresses. Few studies have focused on the roles of HAM subfamily genes. Consequently, we concentrated our analysis on the members of the HAM subfamily. Fourteen motifs were identified in the HAM family proteins from both Triticeae species and Arabidopsis, indicating that these motifs were highly conserved during evolution. Promoter analysis indicated that the promoters of HAM genes contain several cis-regulatory elements associated with hormone response, stress response, light response, and growth and development. Both qRT-PCR and RNA-seq data analyses demonstrated that TaeSCL6 responds to Blumeria graminis infection. Therefore, we investigated the role of TaeSCL6 in regulating wheat resistance via RNA interference and barley stripe mosaic virus induced gene silencing. Wheat plants with silenced TaeSCL6 exhibited increased susceptibility to powdery mildew.ConclusionsIn summary, this study not only validates the positive role of TaeSCL6 in wheat resistance to powdery mildew, but also provides candidate gene resources for future breeding of disease-resistance wheat cultivars.
DNA methylation is an epigenetic mechanism that regulates gene expression, and for mammals typically occurs on cytosines within CpG dinucleotides. A significant challenge for methylation detection methods is accurately measuring methylation levels within GC-rich regions such as gene promoters, as inaccuracies compromise downstream biological interpretation of the data. To address this challenge, we compared methylation levels assayed using four different Methods Enzymatic Methyl-seq (EM-seq), whole genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS), Infinium arrays (Illumina MethylationEPIC, "EPIC"), and Oxford Nanopore Technologies nanopore sequencing (ONT) applied to human DNA. Overall, all methods produced comparable and consistent methylation readouts across the human genome. The flexibility offered by current gold standard WGBS in interrogating genome-wide cytosines is surpassed technically by both EM-seq and ONT, as their coverages and methylation readouts are less prone to GC bias. These advantages are tempered by increased laboratory time (EM-seq) and higher complexity (ONT). We further assess the strengths and weaknesses of each method, and provide recommendations in choosing the most appropriate methylation method for specific scientific questions or translational needs.
Background Cetaceans, having experienced prolonged adaptation to aquatic environments, have undergone evolutionary changes in their respiratory systems. This process of evolution has resulted in the emergence of distinctive phenotypic traits, notably the abundance of elastic fibers and thickened alveolar walls in their lungs, which may facilitate alveolar collapse during diving. This structure helps selective exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide, while minimizing nitrogen exchange, thereby reducing the risk of DCS. Nevertheless, the scientific inquiry into the mechanisms through which these unique phenotypic characteristics govern the diving behavior of marine mammals, including cetaceans, remains unresolved.Results This study entails an evolutionary analysis of 42 genes associated with pulmonary fibrosis across 45 mammalian species. Twenty-one genes in cetaceans exhibited accelerated evolution, featuring specific amino acid substitutions in 14 of them. Primarily linked to the development of the respiratory system and lung morphological construction, these genes play a crucial role. Moreover, among marine mammals, we identified eight genes undergoing positive selection, and the evolutionary rates of three genes significantly correlated with diving depth. Specifically, the SFTPC gene exhibited convergent amino acid substitutions. Through in vitro cellular experiments, we illustrated that convergent amino acid site mutations in SFTPC contribute positively to pulmonary fibrosis in marine mammals, and the presence of this phenotype can induce deep alveolar collapse during diving, thereby reducing the risk of DCS during diving.Conclusions The study unveils pivotal genetic signals in cetaceans and other marine mammals, arising through evolution. These genetic signals may influence lung characteristics in marine mammals and have been linked to a reduced risk of developing DCS. Moreover, the research serves as a valuable reference for delving deeper into human diving physiology.
BackgroundChickens play a crucial role as the primary global source of eggs and poultry, and the quality of rooster semen significantly impacts poultry reproductive efficiency. Therefore, it is imperative to comprehend the regulatory mechanisms underlying sperm development.ResultsIn this study, we established transcriptome profiles of lncRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs in 3 testis tissues and 3 epididymis tissues from "Jing Hong No.1" roosters at 24, 35, and 64 weeks of age. Using the data, we conducted whole transcriptome analysis and constructed a ceRNA network. We detected 10 differentially expressed mRNAs (DEmRNAs), 33 differentially expressed lncRNAs (DElncRNAs), and 10 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEmiRNAs) in the testis, as well as 149 DEmRNAs, 12 DElncRNAs, and 10 DEmiRNAs in the epididymis. These genes were found to be involved in cell differentiation and development, as well as various signaling pathways such as GnRH, MAPK, TGF-beta, mTOR, VEGF, and calcium ion pathways. Subsequently, we constructed two competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) networks comprising DEmRNAs, DElncRNAs, and DEmiRNAs. Furthermore, we identified four crucial lncRNA-mRNA-miRNA interactions that govern specific biological processes in the chicken reproductive system: MSTRG.2423.1-gga-miR-1563-PPP3CA and MSTRG.10064.2-gga-miR-32-5p-GPR12 regulating sperm motility in the testis; MSTRG.152556.1-gga-miR-9-3p-GREM1/THYN1 governing immunomodulation in the epididymis; and MSTRG.124708.1-gga-miR-375-NDUFB9/YBX1 controlling epididymal sperm maturation and motility.ConclusionsWhole transcriptome sequencing of chicken testis and epididymis screened several key genes and ceRNA regulatory networks, which may be involved in the regulation of epididymal immunity, spermatogenesis and sperm viability through the pathways of MAPK, TGF-beta, mTOR, and calcium ion. These findings contribute to our comprehensive understanding of the intricate molecular processes underlying rooster spermatogenesis, maturation and motility.
BackgroundMeat quality in yak is influenced by the fluctuation of nutritional composition in different grazing seasons on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. However, the molecular mechanism underlying in yak meat remains unknown. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the seasonal dynamics of meat quality in yak by transcriptomics and metabolomics techniques. Twelve healthy female yaks with a similar weight were divided into two groups, including the warm season group (WS) and cold season group (CS). After slaughter, samples of longissimus lumborum were collected and subjected to transcriptomics and metabolomics to explore the effects of different seasons on meat quality.ResultsYak in the WS group had higher contents of n-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA), n-6 PUFA, threonine, and valine compared to the CS group, but the pH45min and b* values were lower. A total of 75 differentially expressed metabolites in the longissimus lumborum muscle were identified, with 23 metabolites upregulated and 52 metabolites downregulated in the WS group. These metabolites were mainly enriched in the pathway of glycine, serine and threonine metabolism, tryptophan metabolism, and carbohydrate digestion and absorption. In comparison, the WS group exhibited 262 upregulated genes in the longissimus lumborum muscle and 81 downregulated genes relatives to the CS group, which were enriched in the fat deposition of TGF-beta, ECM-receptor interaction, MAPK, and PPAR signaling pathway.ConclusionsAmong these, downregulated genes NPNT, GADL1, SESN3, and CPXM1 were associated with lipid metabolism and fat deposition in grazing yaks. It was found that DDC, DHTKD1, CCBL1, GCDH, and AOC1 involved in the tryptophan metabolism played an important role in the regulation of energy metabolism in yak.
Background Mammary gland development is a critical process in mammals, crucial for their reproductive success and offspring nourishment. However, the functional roles of key candidate genes associated with teat number, including ABCD4, VRTN, PROX2, and DLST, in this developmental process remain elusive. To address this gap in knowledge, we conducted an in-depth investigation into the dynamic expression patterns, functional implications, and regulatory networks of these candidate genes during mouse mammary gland development. Results In this study, the spatial and temporal patterns of key genes were characterized in mammary gland development. Using time-series single-cell data, we uncovered differences in the expression of A bcd4, Vrtn, Prox2, and Dlst in cell population of the mammary gland during embryonic and adult stages, while Vrtn was not detected in any cells. We found that only overexpression and knockdown of Abcd4 could inhibit proliferation and promote apoptosis of HC11 mammary epithelial cells, whereas Prox2 and Dlst had no significant effect on these cells. Using RNA-seq and qPCR, further analysis revealed that Abcd4 can induce widespread changes in the expression levels of genes involved in mammary gland development, such as Igfbp3, Ccl5, Tlr2, and Prlr, which were primarily associated with the MAPK, JAK-STAT, and PI3K-AKT pathways by functional enrichment. Conclusions These findings revealed ABCD4 as a candidate gene pivotal for regulating mammary gland development and lactation during pregnancy by influencing PRLR expression.
BackgroundDiscontinuous transcription allows coronaviruses to efficiently replicate and transmit within host cells, enhancing their adaptability and survival. Assembling viral transcripts is crucial for virology research and the development of antiviral strategies. However, traditional transcript assembly methods primarily designed for variable alternative splicing events in eukaryotes are not suitable for the viral transcript assembly problem. The current algorithms designed for assembling viral transcripts often struggle with low accuracy in determining the transcript boundaries. There is an urgent need to develop a highly accurate viral transcript assembly algorithm.ResultsIn this work, we propose Cov-trans, a reference-based transcript assembler specifically tailored for the discontinuous transcription of coronaviruses. Cov-trans first identifies canonical transcripts based on discontinuous transcription mechanisms, start and stop codons, as well as reads alignment information. Subsequently, it formulates the assembly of non-canonical transcripts as a path extraction problem, and introduces a mixed integer linear programming to recover these non-canonical transcripts.ConclusionExperimental results show that Cov-trans outperforms other assemblers in both accuracy and recall, with a notable strength in accurately identifying the boundaries of transcripts. Cov-trans is freely available at https://github.com/computer-Bioinfo/Cov-trans.git.
BackgroundThe leopard coral grouper (Plectropomus leopardus) is a commercially valuable tropical marine fish species known to be sensitive to low temperatures. A comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing its response to acute cold stress is of great importance. However, there is a relative scarcity of fundamental research on low-temperature tolerance in the leopard coral grouper.MethodsIn this study, a cooling and rewarming experiment was conducted on 6-month-old leopard coral groupers. Within 24 h, we decreased the ambient temperature from 25 degrees C to 13 degrees C and subsequently allowed it to naturally return to 25 degrees C. During this process, a comprehensive investigation of serum hormone levels, enzyme activity, and brain transcriptome analysis was performed.ResultsP. leopardus displayed a noticeable adaptive response to the initial temperature decrease by temporarily reducing its life activities. Our transcriptome analysis revealed that the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were primarily concentrated in crucial pathways including the blood-brain barrier (BBB), inflammatory response, and coagulation cascade. In situ hybridization of claudin 15a (cldn15a), a key gene for BBB maintaining, further confirmed that exposure to low temperatures led to the disruption of the blood-brain barrier and stimulated a pronounced inflammatory reaction within the brain. Upon rewarming, there was a recovery of BBB integrity accompanied by the persistence of inflammation within the brain tissue.ConclusionsOur study reveals the complex interactions between blood-brain barrier function, inflammation, and recovery in P. leopardus during short-term temperature drops and rewarming. These findings provide valuable insights into the physiological responses of this species under cold stress conditions.
Phytochrome-interacting factors (PIFs) are a subgroup of transcription factors within the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family, playing a crucial role in integrating various environmental signals to regulate plant growth and development. Despite the significance of PIFs in these processes, a comprehensive genome-wide analysis of PIFs in conifers has yet to be conducted. In this investigation, three PtPIF genes were identified in Chinese pine, categorized into three subgroups, with conserved motifs indicating the presence of the APA/APB motif and bHLH domain in the PtPIF1 and PtPIF3 proteins. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the PtPIF1 and PtPIF3 proteins belong to the PIF7/8 and PIF3 groups, respectively, and were relatively conserved among gymnosperms. Additionally, a class of PIF lacking APA/APB motif was identified in conifers, suggesting its function may differ from that of traditional PIFs. The cis-elements of the PtPIF genes were systematically examined, and analysis of PtPIF gene expression across various tissues and under different light, temperature, and plant hormone conditions demonstrated similar expression profiles for PtPIF1 and PtPIF3. Investigations into protein-protein interactions and co-expression networks speculated the involvement of PtPIFs and PtPHYA/Bs in circadian rhythms and hormone signal transduction. Further analysis of transcriptome data and experimental validation indicated an interaction between PtPIF3 and PtPHYB1, potentially linked to diurnal rhythms. Notably, the study revealed that PtPIF3 may be involved in gibberellic acid (GA) signaling through its interaction with PtDELLAs, suggesting a potential role for PtPIF3 in mediating both light and GA responses. Overall, this research provides a foundation for future studies investigating the functions of PIFs in conifer growth and development.
Background The Atlantic cod is a prolific species in the Atlantic, despite its inconsistent specific antibody response. It presents a peculiar case within vertebrate immunology due to its distinct immune system, characterized by the absence of MHCII antigen presentation pathway, required for T cell-dependent antibody responses. Thorough characterisation of immunoglobulin loci and analysis of the antibody repertoire is necessary to further our understanding of the Atlantic cod's immune response on a molecular level. Results A comprehensive search of the cod genome (gadmor3.0) identified the complete set of IgH genes organized into three sequential translocons on chromosome 2, while IgL genes were located on chromosomes 2 and 5. The Atlantic cod displayed a moderate germline V gene diversity, comprising four V gene families for both IgH and IgL, each with distinct chromosomal locations and organizational structures. 5'RACE sequencing revealed a diverse range of heavy chain CDR3 sequences and relatively limited CDR3 diversity in light chains. The analysis highlighted a differential impact of V-gene germline CDR3 length on receptor CDR3 length between heavy and light chains, underlining different recombination processes. Conclusions This study reveals that the Atlantic cod, despite its inconsistent antibody response, maintains a level of immunoglobulin diversity comparable to other fish species. The findings suggest that the extensive recent duplications of kappa light chain genes do not result in increased repertoire diversity. This research provides a comprehensive view of the Atlantic cod's immunoglobulin gene organization and repertoire, necessary for future studies of antibody responses at the molecular level.
BackgroundAlcohol consumption is widely known to have detrimental effects on various organs and tissues. The effects of ethanol on male reproduction have been studied at the physiological and cellular levels, but no systematic study has examined the effects of ethanol on male reproduction-related gene expression.ResultsWe employed a model of chronic ethanol administration using the Lieber-DeCarli diet. Ethanol-fed mice showed normal testicular and epididymal integrity, and sperm morphology, but decreased sperm count. Total RNA sequencing analysis of testes from ethanol-fed mice showed that a small fraction (similar to 2%) of testicular genes were differentially expressed in ethanol-fed mice and that, of these genes, 28% were cell-type specific in the testis. Various in silico analyses were performed, and gene set enrichment analysis revealed that sperm tail structure-related genes, including forkhead box J1 (Foxj1), were down-regulated in testes of ethanol-fed mice. Consistent with this result, ethanol-fed mice exhibited decreased sperm motility.ConclusionThis study provides the first comprehensive transcriptomic profiling of ethanol-induced changes in the mouse testis, and suggests gene expression profile changes as a potential mechanism underlying ethanol-mediated reproductive dysfunction, such as impaired sperm motility.
Background Pseudomonas putida S12 is a gram-negative bacterium renowned for its high tolerance to organic solvents and metabolic versatility, making it attractive for various applications, including bioremediation and the production of aromatic compounds, bioplastics, biofuels, and value-added compounds. However, a metabolic model of S12 has yet to be developed.Results In this study, we present a comprehensive and highly curated genome-scale metabolic network model of S12 (iSH1474), containing 1,474 genes, 1,436 unique metabolites, and 2,938 metabolic reactions. The model was constructed by leveraging existing metabolic models and conducting comparative analyses of genomes and phenomes. Approximately 2,000 different phenotypes were measured for S12 and its closely related KT2440 strain under various nutritional and environmental conditions. These phenotypic data, combined with the reported experimental data, were used to refine and validate the reconstruction. Model predictions quantitatively agreed well with in vivo flux measurements and the batch cultivation of S12, which demonstrated that iSH1474 accurately represents the metabolic capabilities of S12. Furthermore, the model was simulated to investigate the maximum theoretical metabolic capacity of S12 growing on toxic organic solvents.Conclusions iSH1474 represents a significant advancement in our understanding of the cellular metabolism of P. putida S12. The combined results of metabolic simulation and comparative genome and phenome analyses identified the genetic and metabolic determinants of the characteristic phenotypes of S12. This study could accelerate the development of this versatile organism as an efficient cell factory for various biotechnological applications.
BackgroundPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a lethal malignancy with a five-year survival rate of approximately 10%. Genetic mutations are pivotal drivers in PDAC pathogenesis, but recent investigations also revealed the involvement of non-genetic alterations in the disease development. In this study, we undertook a multi-omics approach, encompassing ATAC-seq, RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, and Hi-C methodologies, to dissect gene expression alterations arising from changes in chromosome accessibility and chromatin three-dimensional interactions in PDAC.ResultsOur findings indicate that chromosomal structural alterations can lead to abnormal expressions on key genes during PDAC development. Notably, overexpression of oncogenes FGFR2, FOXA2, CYP2R1, and CPOX can be attributed to the augmentation of promoter accessibility, coupled with long-range interactions with distal elements. Additionally, our findings indicate that chromosomal structural alterations caused by genomic instability can lead to abnormal expressions in PDACs. As an example, by analyzing chromosomal changes, we identified a putative oncogenic gene, LPAR1, which shows upregulated expression in both PDAC cell lines and clinical samples. The overexpression is correlated with alterations in LPAR1-associated 3D genome structure and chromatin state. We further demonstrated that high LPAR1 activity is required for enhanced PDAC cell migration in vitro.ConclusionsCollectively, our findings reveal that the chromosomal conformational alterations, in addition to the well-known genetic mutations, are critical for PDAC tumorigenesis.
BackgroundVesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is a typical non-segmented negative-sense RNA virus of the genus Vesiculovirus in the family Rhabdoviridae. VSV can infect a wide range of animals, including humans, with oral blister epithelial lesions. VSV is an excellent model virus with a wide range of applications as a molecular tool, a vaccine vector, and an oncolytic vector. To further understand the interaction between VSV and host cells and to provide a theoretical basis for the application prospects of VSV, we analyzed the expression of host differentially expressed genes (DEGs) during VSV infection using RNA-Seq.ResultsOur analyses found a total of 1015 differentially expressed mRNAs and 161 differentially expressed LncRNAs in BHK-21 cells infected with VSV for 24 h compared with controls. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment showed that the differentially expressed lncRNAs and their target genes were mainly concentrated in pathways related to apoptosis, cancer, disease, and immune system activation, including the TNF, P53, MAPK, and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. The differentially expressed lncRNA can modulate immune processes by regulating genes involved in these signaling transmissions. Ten randomly selected DEGs, namely, Il12rb2, F2, Masp2, Mcl1, FGF18, Ripk1, Fas, BMF, POLK, and JAG1, were validated using RT-qPCR. As predicted through RNA-Seq analysis, these DEGs underwent either up- or downregulation, suggesting that they may play key regulatory roles in the pathways mentioned previously.ConclusionsOur study showed that VSV infection alters the host metabolic network and activates immune-related pathways, such as MAPK and TNF. The above findings provide unique insights for further study of the mechanism of VSV-host interactions and, more importantly, provide a theoretical basis for VSV as an excellent vaccine carrier.
Analyzing the genetic diversity and selection characteristics of sheep (Ovis aries) holds significant value in understanding their environmental adaptability, enhancing breeding efficiency, and achieving effective conservation and rational utilization of genetic resources. In this study, we utilized Illumina Ovine SNP 50 K BeadChip data from four indigenous sheep breeds from the southern margin of the Taklamakan Desert (Duolang sheep: n = 36, Hetian sheep: n = 74, Kunlun sheep: n = 27, Qira black sheep: n = 178) and three foreign meat sheep breeds (Poll Dorset sheep: n = 105, Suffolk sheep: n = 153, Texel sheep: n = 150) to investigate the population structure, genetic diversity, and genomic signals of positive selection within the indigenous sheep. According to the Principal component analysis (PCA), the Neighbor-Joining tree (NJ tree), and Admixture, we revealed distinct clustering patterns of these seven sheep breeds based on their geographical distribution. Then used Cross Population Extended Haplotype Homozygosity (XP-EHH), Fixation Index (FST), and Integrated Haplotype Score (iHS), we identified a collective set of 32 overlapping genes under positive selection across four indigenous sheep breeds. These genes are associated with wool follicle development and wool traits, desert environmental adaptability, disease resistance, reproduction, and high-altitude adaptability. This study reveals the population structure and genomic selection characteristics in the extreme desert environments of native sheep breeds from the southern edge of the Taklimakan Desert, providing new insights into the conservation and sustainable use of indigenous sheep genetic resources in extreme environments. Additionally, these findings offer valuable genetic resources for sheep and other mammals to adapt to global climate change.
Pseudoalteromonas viridis strain BBR56 was isolated from seawater at Dutungan Island, South Sulawesi, Indonesia. Bacterial DNA was isolated using Promega Genomic DNA TM050. DNA purity and quantity were assessed using NanoDrop spectrophotometers and Qubit fluorometers. The DNA library and sequencing were prepared using Oxford Nanopore Technology GridION MinKNOW 20.06.9 with long read, direct, and comprehensive analysis. High accuracy base calling was assessed with Guppy version 4.0.11. Filtlong and NanoPlot were used for filtering and visualizing the FASTQ data. Flye (2.8.1) was used for de novo assembly analysis. Variant calls and consensus sequences were created using Medaka. The annotation of the genome was elaborated by DFAST. The assembled genome and annotation were tested using Busco and CheckM. Herein, we found that the highest similarity of the BBR56 isolate was 98.37% with the 16 S rRNA gene sequence of P. viridis G-1387. The genome size was 5.5 Mb and included chromosome 1 (4.2 Mbp) and chromosome 2 (1.3 Mbp), which encoded 61 pseudogenes, 4 noncoding RNAs, 113 tRNAs, 31 rRNAs, 4,505 coding DNA sequences, 4 clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, 4,444 coding genes, and a GC content of 49.5%. The sequence of the whole genome of P. viridis BBR56 was uploaded to GenBank under the accession numbers CP072425-CP072426, biosample number SAMN18435505, and bioproject number PRJNA716373. The sequence read archive (SRR14179986) was successfully obtained from NCBI for BBR56 raw sequencing reads. Digital DNA-DNA hybridization results showed that the genome of BBR56 had the potential to be a new species because no other bacterial genomes were similar to the sample. Biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) were assessed using BAGEL4 and the antiSMASH bacterial version. The genome harbored diverse BGCs, including genes that encoded polyketide synthase, nonribosomal peptide synthase, RiPP-like, NRP-metallophore, hydrogen cyanide, betalactone, thioamide-NRP, Lant class I, sactipeptide, and prodigiosin. Thus, BBR56 has considerable potential for further exploration regarding the use of its secondary metabolite products in the human and fisheries sectors.
BackgroundLarch is an important component of northern forests and a major cultivated tree species in restoration of forest cover using improved seed material. In recent years, the continuous low seed production has severely affected the production of improved variety seedlings and natural regeneration. However, research on the reproductive growth of gymnosperms is extremely scarce.ResultsIn this study, based on differential transcriptome analysis of two asexual reproductive phases, namely high-yield and low-yield, we further screened 5 ERF family genes that may affect the reproductive development of larch. We analyzed their genetic relationships and predicted their physicochemical properties. The expression patterns of these genes were analyzed in different tissues, developmental stages, hormone treatments, and environmental conditions in hybrid larch.ConclusionThe results showed that all 5 genes were induced by low temperature and ABA, and their expression patterns in different tissues suggested a suppressive role in the development of female cones in larch. Among them, LkoERF3-like1 and LkoERF071 may be involved in the flowering age pathway. This study enriches the scarce research on reproductive development in gymnosperms and provides a theoretical basis and research direction for regulating the reproductive development of larch in seed orchards.
Background Conducting genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for reproductive traits in Hanwoo cattle, including age at first calving (AFC), calving interval (CI), gestation length (GL), and number of artificial inseminations per conception (NAIPC), is of paramount significance. These analyses provided a thorough exploration of the genetic basis of these traits, facilitating the identification of key markers for targeted trait improvement. Breeders can optimize their selection strategies, leading to more efficient and sustainable breeding programs, by incorporating genetic insights. This impact extends beyond individual traits and contributes to the overall productivity and profitability of the Hanwoo beef cattle industry. Ultimately, GWAS is essential in ensuring the long-term genetic resilience and adaptability of Hanwoo cattle populations. The primary goal of this study was to identify significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or quantitative trait loci (QTLs) associated with the studied reproductive traits and subsequently map the underlying genes that hold promise for trait improvement.Results A genome-wide association study of reproductive traits identified 68 significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed across 29 Bos taurus autosomes (BTA). Among them, BTA14 exhibited the highest number of identified SNPs (25), whereas BTA6, BTA7, BTA8, BTA10, BTA13, BTA17, and BTA20 exhibited 8, 5, 5, 3, 8, 2, and 12 significant SNPs, respectively. Annotation of candidate genes within a 500 kb region surrounding the significant SNPs led to the identification of ten candidate genes relevant to age at first calving. These genes were: FANCG, UNC13B, TESK1, TLN1, and CREB3 on BTA8; FAM110B, UBXN2B, SDCBP, and TOX on BTA14; and MAP3K1 on BTA20. Additionally, APBA3, TCF12, and ZFR2, located on BTA7 and BTA10, were associated with the calving interval; PAX1, SGCD, and HAND1, located on BTA7 and BTA13, were linked to gestation length; and RBM47, UBE2K, and GPX8, located on BTA6 and BTA20, were linked to the number of artificial inseminations per conception in Hanwoo cows.Conclusions The findings of this study enhance our knowledge of the genetic factors that influence reproductive traits in Hanwoo cattle populations and provide a foundation for future breeding strategies focused on improving desirable traits in beef cattle. This research offers new evidence and insights into the genetic variants and genome regions associated with reproductive traits and contributes valuable information to guide future efforts in cattle breeding.
Several indigenous cattle breeds in Sweden are endangered. Conservation of their genetic diversity and genomic characterization is a priority.Whole-genome sequences (WGS) with a mean coverage of 25X, ranging from 14 to 41X were obtained for 30 individuals of the breeds Fjallko, Fjallnara, Bohuskulla, Rodkulla, Ringamala, and Vaneko. WGS-based genotyping revealed 22,548,028 variants in total, comprising 18,876,115 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 3,671,913 indels. Out of these, 1,154,779 SNPs and 304,467 indels were novel. Population stratification based on roughly 19 million SNPs showed two major groups of the breeds that correspond to northern and southern breeds. Overall, a higher genetic diversity was observed in the southern breeds compared to the northern breeds. While the population stratification was consistent with previous genome-wide SNP array-based analyses, the genealogy of the individuals inferred from WGS based estimates turned out to be more complex than expected from previous SNP-array based estimates. Polymorphisms and their predicted phenotypic consequences were associated with differences in the coat color phenotypes between the northern and southern breeds. Notably, these high-consequence polymorphisms were not represented in SNP arrays, which are used routinely for genotyping of cattle breeds.This study is the first WGS-based population genetic analysis of Swedish native cattle breeds. The genetic diversity of native breeds was found to be high. High-consequence polymorphisms were linked with desirable phenotypes using whole-genome genotyping, which highlights the pressing need for intensifying WGS-based characterization of the native breeds.
BackgroundOrganisms from many distinct evolutionary lineages acquired the capacity to enter a dormant state in response to environmental conditions incompatible with maintaining normal life activities. Most studied organisms exhibit seasonal or annual episodes of dormancy, but numerous less studied organisms enter long-term dormancy, lasting decades or even centuries. Intriguingly, many planktonic animals produce encased embryos known as resting eggs or cysts that, like plant seeds, may remain dormant for decades. Herein, we studied a rotifer Brachionus plicatilis as a model planktonic species that forms encased dormant embryos via sexual reproduction and non-dormant embryos via asexual reproduction and raised the following questions: Which genes are expressed at which time points during embryogenesis? How do temporal transcript abundance profiles differ between the two types of embryos? When does the cell cycle arrest? How do dormant embryos manage energy?ResultsAs the molecular developmental kinetics of encased embryos remain unknown, we employed single embryo RNA sequencing (CEL-seq) of samples collected during dormant and non-dormant embryogenesis. We identified comprehensive and temporal transcript abundance patterns of genes and their associated enriched functional pathways. Striking differences were uncovered between dormant and non-dormant embryos. In early development, the cell cycle-associated pathways were enriched in both embryo types but terminated with fewer nuclei in dormant embryos. As development progressed, the gene transcript abundance profiles became increasingly divergent between dormant and non-dormant embryos. Organogenesis was suspended in dormant embryos, concomitant with low transcript abundance of homeobox genes, and was replaced with an ATP-poor preparatory phase characterized by very high transcript abundance of genes encoding for hallmark dormancy proteins (e.g., LEA proteins, sHSP, and anti-ROS proteins, also found in plant seeds) and proteins involved in dormancy exit. Surprisingly, this period appeared analogous to the late maturation phase of plant seeds.ConclusionsThe study highlights novel divergent temporal transcript abundance patterns between dormant and non-dormant embryos. Remarkably, several convergent functional solutions appear during the development of resting eggs and plant seeds, suggesting a similar preparatory phase for long-term dormancy. This study accentuated the broad novel molecular features of long-term dormancy in encased animal embryos that behave like "animal seeds".
Background Environmental stress factors, such as biotic and abiotic stress, are becoming more common due to climate variability, significantly affecting global maize yield. Transcriptome profiling studies provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying stress response in maize, though the functions of many genes are still unknown. To enhance the functional annotation of maize-specific genes, MaizeGDB has outlined a data-driven approach with an emphasis on identifying genes and traits related to biotic and abiotic stress.Results We mapped high-quality RNA-Seq expression reads from 24 different publicly available datasets (17 abiotic and seven biotic studies) generated from the B73 cultivar to the recent version of the reference genome B73 (B73v5) and deduced stress-related functional annotation of maize gene models. We conducted a robust meta-analysis of the transcriptome profiles from the datasets to identify maize loci responsive to stress, identifying 3,230 differentially expressed genes (DEGs): 2,555 DEGs regulated in response to abiotic stress, 408 DEGs regulated during biotic stress, and 267 common DEGs (co-DEGs) that overlap between abiotic and biotic stress. We discovered hub genes from network analyses, and among the hub genes of the co-DEGs we identified a putative NAC domain transcription factor superfamily protein (Zm00001eb369060) IDP275, which previously responded to herbivory and drought stress. IDP275 was up-regulated in our analysis in response to eight different abiotic and four different biotic stresses. A gene set enrichment and pathway analysis of hub genes of the co-DEGs revealed hormone-mediated signaling processes and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways, respectively. Using phylostratigraphic analysis, we also demonstrated how abiotic and biotic stress genes differentially evolve to adapt to changing environments.Conclusions These results will help facilitate the functional annotation of multiple stress response gene models and annotation in maize. Data can be accessed and downloaded at the Maize Genetics and Genomics Database (MaizeGDB).
Background Squamosa promoter-binding protein-like (SPL) is a plant-specific transcription factor that is widely involved in the regulation of plant growth and development, including flower and grain development, stress responses, and secondary metabolite synthesis. However, this gene family has not been comprehensively evaluated in barley, the most adaptable cereal crop with a high nutritional value. Results In this study, a total of 15 HvSPL genes were identified based on the Hordeum vulgare genome. These genes were named HvSPL1 to HvSPL15 based on the chromosomal distribution of the HvSPL genes and were divided into seven groups (I, II, III, V, VI, VII, and VIII) based on the phylogenetic tree analysis. Chromosomal localization revealed one pair of tandem duplicated genes and one pair of segmental duplicated genes. The HvSPL genes exhibited the highest collinearity with the monocotyledonous plant, Zea mays (27 pairs), followed by Oryza sativa (18 pairs), Sorghum bicolor (16 pairs), and Arabidopsis thaliana (3 pairs), and the fewest homologous genes with Solanum lycopersicum (1 pair). The distribution of the HvSPL genes in the evolutionary tree was relatively scattered, and HvSPL proteins tended to cluster with SPL proteins from Z. mays and O. sativa, indicating a close relationship between HvSPL and SPL proteins from monocotyledonous plants. Finally, the spatial and temporal expression patterns of the 14 HvSPL genes from different subfamilies were determined using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Based on the results, the HvSPL gene family exhibited tissue-specific expression and played a regulatory role in grain development and abiotic stress. HvSPL genes are highly expressed in various tissues during seed development. The expression levels of HvSPL genes under the six abiotic stress conditions indicated that many genes responded to stress, especially HvSPL8, which exhibited high expression under multiple stress conditions, thereby warranting further attention. Conclusion In this study, 15 SPL gene family members were identified in the genome of Hordeum vulgare, and the phylogenetic relationships, gene structure, replication events, gene expression, and potential roles of these genes in millet development were studied. Our findings lay the foundation for exploring the HvSPL genes and performing molecular breeding of barley.
Background Saliva plays a crucial role in shaping the feeding behavior of insects, involving processes such as food digestion and the regulation of interactions between insects and their hosts. Cyrtorhinus lividipennis serves as a predominant natural enemy of rice pests, while Apolygus lucorum, exhibiting phytozoophagous feeding behavior, is a destructive agricultural pest. In this study, a comparative transcriptome analysis, incorporating the published genomes of C.lividipennis and A.lucorum, was conducted to reveal the role of salivary secretion in host adaptation.Results In contrast to A.lucorum, C.lividipennis is a zoophytophagous insect. A de novo genome analysis of C.lividipennis yielded 19,706 unigenes, including 16,217 annotated ones. On the other hand, A.lucorum had altogether 20,111 annotated genes, as obtained from the published official gene set (20,353 unigenes). Functional analysis of the top 1,000 salivary gland (SG)-abundant genes in both insects revealed that the SG was a dynamically active tissue engaged in protein synthesis and secretion. Predictions of other tissues and signal peptides were compared. As a result, 94 and 157 salivary proteins were identified in C.lividipennis and A.lucorum, respectively, and were categorized into 68 and 81 orthogroups. Among them, 26 orthogroups were shared, potentially playing common roles in digestion and detoxification, including several venom serine proteases. Furthermore, 42 and 55 orthogroups were exclusive in C.lividipennis and A.lucorum, respectively, which were exemplified by a hyaluronidase in C.lividipennis that was associated with predation, while polygalacturonases in A.lucorum were involved in mesophyll-feeding patterns.Conclusions Findings in this study provide a comprehensive insight into saliva secretions in C.lividipennis and A.lucorum via a transcriptome approach, reflecting the intricate connections between saliva secretions and feeding behaviors. It is found that conserved salivary secretions are involved in shaping the overlapping feeding patterns, while a plethora of unique salivary secretions may drive the evolution of specific feeding behaviors crucial for their survival. These results enhance our understanding of the feeding mechanisms in different insects from the perspective of saliva and contribute to future environmentally friendly pest control by utilizing predatory insects.
BackgroundOphiocordyceps sinensis (O. sinensis) is the dominant bacterium in the asexual stage of Chinese cordyceps, and its growth usually suffers from water stress. Thus, simulating its ecological growth environment is crucial for artificial cultivation. This study aimed to reveal the mechanism underlying the water stress tolerance of Ophiocordyceps sinensis (O. sinensis) by combining metabolomic and transcriptome analyses to identify crucial pathways related to differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and metabolites (DEMs) involved in the response to water stress.ResultsGene coexpression analysis revealed that many genes related to 'betalain biosynthesis', 'tyrosine metabolism', 'linoleic acid metabolism', 'fructose and mannose metabolism', and 'starch and sucrose metabolism' were highly upregulated after 20d-water stress. Metabolomic analysis revealed that many metabolites regulated by these genes in these metabolic pathways were markedly decreased. On the one hand, we surmised that carbohydrate metabolism and the beta-oxidation pathway worked cooperatively to generate enough acyl-CoA and then entered the TCA cycle to provide energy when exposed to water stress. On the other hand, the betalain biosynthesis and tyrosine metabolism pathway might play crucial roles in response to water stress in O. sinensis by enhancing cell osmotic potential and producing osmoregulatory substances (betaine) and antioxidant pigments (eumelanin).ConclusionsOverall, our findings provide important information for further exploration of the mechanism underlying the water stress tolerance of O. sinensis for the industrialization of artificial cultivation of Chinese cordyceps.
The H3 subtype of avian influenza virus (AIV) stands out as one of the most prevalent subtypes, posing a significant threat to public health. In this study, a novel triple-reassortant H3N3 AIV designated A/chicken/China/16/2023 (H3N3), was isolated from a sick chicken in northern China. The complete genome of the isolate was determined using next-generation sequencing, and the AIV-like particles were confirmed via transmission electron microscopy. Subsequent phylogenetic analyses revealed that HA and NA genes of the H3N3 isolate clustered within the Eurasian lineage of AIVs, exhibiting the closest genetic relationship with other H3N3 AIVs identified in China during 2023. Interestingly, the HA and NA genes of the nove H3N3 isolate were originated from H3N8 and H10N3 AIVs, respectively, and the six internal genes originated from prevalent H9N2 AIVs. These findings indicated the novel H3N3 isolate possesses a complex genetic constellation, likely arising from multiple reassortment events involving H3N8, H9N2, and H10N3 subtype influenza viruses. Additionally, the presence of Q226 and T228 in the HA protein suggests the H3N3 virus preferentially binds to alpha-2,3-linked sialic acid receptors. The HA cleavage site motif (PEKQTR/GIF) and the absence of E627K and D701N mutations in PB2 protein classify the virus as a characteristic low pathogenicity AIV. However, several mutations in internal genes raise concerns about potential increases in viral resistance, virulence, and transmission in mammalian hosts. Overall, this study provides valuable insights into the molecular and genetic characterization of the emerging triple-reassortant H3N3 AIVs, and continued surveillance of domestic poultry is essential for monitoring the H3N3 subtype evolution and potential spread.
Background Hox gene family is an important transcription factor that regulates cell process, and plays a role in the process of adipocytes differentiation and fat deposition. Previous transcriptome sequencing studies have indicated that the Homeobox A9 gene (HOXA9) is a candidate gene for regulating the process of bovine lipid metabolism, but the function and specific mechanism of action remain unclear. Therefore, this study aims to explore the role of HOXA9 in the proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of bovine preadipocytes through gain-of-function and lose-of-function. Result It found HOXA9 highly expressed in bovine adipose tissue, and its expression level changed significantly during adipocytes differentiation process. It gave a hint that HOXA9 may be involved in the process of bovine lipid metabolism. The results of HOXA9 gain-of-function experiments indicated that HOXA9 appeared to act as a negative regulator not only in the differentiation but also in the proliferation of bovine preadipocytes, which is mainly reflected that overexpression of HOXA9 down-regulate the mRNA and protein expression level of PPAR gamma, CEBP alpha and FABP4 (P < 0.05). The mRNA expression level of CDK1, CDK2, PCNA, CCNA2, CCNB1, CCND1 and CCNE2, as well as the protein expression of CDK2 also significantly decreased. The decrease of lipid droplets content was the main characteristic of the phenotype (P < 0.01), which further supported the evidence that HOXA9 was a negative regulator of preadipocytes differentiation. The decrease of cell proliferation rate and EdU positive rate, as well as the limitation of transition of preadipocytes from G0/G1 phase to S phase also provided evidence for the inhibition of proliferation. Apart from this above, we noted an interesting phenomenon that overexpression of HOXA9 showed in a significant upregulation of both mRNA and protein level of apoptosis markers, accompanied by a significant increase in cell apoptosis rate. These data led us not to refute the fact that HOXA9 played an active regulatory role in apoptosis. HOXA9 loss-of-function experiments, however, yielded the opposite results. Considering that HOXA9 acts as a transcription factor, we predicted its target genes. Dual luciferase reporter assay system indicated that overexpression of HOXA9 inhibits activity of PCNA promoter. Conclusion Taken together, we demonstrated for the first time that HOXA9 played a role as a negative regulatory factor in the differentiation and proliferation of preadipocytes, but played a positive regulatory role in apoptosis, and it may play a regulatory role by targeting PCNA. This study provides basic data for further exploring the regulatory network of intramuscular fat deposition in bovine.
Background Shaziling pig is a well-known indigenous breed in China who has superior meat quality traits. However, the genetic mechanism and genomic evidence underlying meat quality characteristics of Shaziling pigs are still unclear. To explore and investigate the germplasm characteristics of Shaziling pigs, we totally analyzed 67 individual's whole genome sequencing data for the first time (20 Shaziling pigs [S], 20 Dabasha pigs [DBS], 11 Yorkshire pigs [Y], 10 Berkshire pigs [BKX], 5 Basha pigs [BS] and 1 Warthog).Results A total of 2,538,577 SNPs with high quality were detected and 9 candidate genes which was specifically selected in S and shared in S to DBS were precisely mined and screened using an integrated analysis strategy of identity-by-descent (IBD) and selective sweep. Of them, dickkopf WNT signaling pathway inhibitor 2 (DKK2), the antagonist of Wnt signaling pathway, was the most promising candidate gene which was not only identified an association of palmitic acid and palmitoleic acid quantitative trait locus in PigQTLdb, but also specifically selected in S compared to other 48 Chinese local pigs of 12 populations and 39 foreign pigs of 4 populations. Subsequently, a mutation at 12,726-bp of DKK2 intron 1 (g.114874954 A > C) was identified associated with intramuscular fat content using method of PCR-RFLP in 21 different pig populations. We observed DKK2 specifically expressed in adipose tissues. Overexpression of DKK2 decreased the content of triglyceride, fatty acid synthase and expression of relevant genes of adipogenic and Wnt signaling pathway, while interference of DKK2 got contrary effect during adipogenesis differentiation of porcine preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells.Conclusions Our findings provide an analysis strategy for mining functional genes of important economic traits and provide fundamental data and molecular evidence for improving pig meat quality traits and molecular breeding.
Background Begomoviruses are major constraint in the production of many crops. Upon infection, begomoviruses may substantially modulate plant biological processes. While how monopartite begomoviruses interact with their plant hosts has been investigated extensively, bipartite begomoviruses-plant interactions are understudied. Moreover, as one of the major groups of hosts, cucurbitaceous plants have been seldom examined in the interaction with begomoviruses. Results We profiled the zucchini transcriptomic changes induced by a bipartite begomovirus squash leaf curl China virus (SLCCNV). We identified 2275 differentially-expressed genes (DEGs), of which 1310 were upregulated and 965 were downregulated. KEGG enrichment analysis of the DEGs revealed that many pathways related to primary and secondary metabolisms were enriched. qRT-PCR verified the transcriptional changes of twelve selected DEGs induced by SLCCNV infection. Close examination revealed that the expression levels of all the DEGs of the pathway Photosynthesis were downregulated upon SLCCNV infection. Most DEGs in the pathway Plant-pathogen interaction were upregulated, including some positive regulators of plant defenses. Moreover, the majority of DEGs in the MAPK signaling pathway-plant were upregulated. Conclusion Our findings indicates that SLCCNV actively interact with its cucurbitaceous plant host by suppressing the conversion of light energy to chemical energy and inducing immune responses. Our study not only provides new insights into the interactions between begomoviruses and host plants, but also adds to our knowledge on virus-plant interactions in general.
Background Anadara granosa, commonly known as the blood clam, exhibits the unusual characteristic of having red blood among invertebrates. There is significant individual variation in blood color intensity among blood clams; individuals with vibrant red blood are deemed healthier and exhibit stronger stress resistance. However, the molecular basis underlying these red blood traits (RBTs) remains poorly understood. Results In this study, we performed genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in a population of 300 A. granosa individuals, focusing on RBTs as measured by hemoglobin concentration (HC), total hemocyte count (THC), and heme concentration (HEME). Our analysis identified 18 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) correlated with RBTs, subsequently selected 117 candidate genes within a 100 kb flanking region of these SNPs, potentially involved in the RBTs of A. granosa. Moreover, we discovered two haplotype blocks specifically associated with THC and HEME. Further analysis revealed eight genes (Septin7, Hox5, Cbfa2t3, Avpr1b, Hhex, Eif2ak3, Glrk, and Rpl35a) that significantly influence RBTs. Notably, a heterozygous A/T mutation in the 3'UTR of Cbfa2t3 was found to promote blood cell proliferation. These genes suggest that the hematopoietic function plays a significant role in the variability of RBTs in A. granosa. Conclusions Our findings reveal a conservation of the regulatory mechanisms of RBTs between blood clams and vertebrates. The results not only provide a scientific basis for selective breeding in blood clams, but also offer deeper insights into the evolutionary mechanisms of RBTs in invertebrates.
Background The holothurians, commonly known as sea cucumbers, are marine organisms that possess significant dietary, nutritional, and medicinal value. However, the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) currently possesses only approximately 70 complete mitochondrial genome datasets of Holothurioidea, which poses limitations on conducting comprehensive research on their genetic resources and evolutionary patterns. In this study, a novel species of sea cucumber belonging to the genus Benthodytes, was discovered in the western Pacific Ocean. The genomic DNA of the novel sea cucumber was extracted, sequenced, assembled and subjected to thorough analysis. Results The mtDNA of Benthodytes sp. Gxx-2023 (GenBank No. OR992091) exhibits a circular structure spanning 17,386 bp, comprising of 13 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 24 non-coding RNAs (2 rRNA genes and 22 tRNA genes), along with two putative control regions measuring 882 bp and 1153 bp, respectively. It exhibits a high AT% content and negative AT-skew, which distinguishing it from the majority of sea cucumbers in terms of environmental adaptability evolution. The mitochondrial gene homology between Gxx-2023 and other sea cucumbers is significantly low, with less than 91% similarity to Benthodytes marianensis, which exhibits the highest level of homology. Additionally, its homology with other sea cucumbers is below 80%. The mitogenome of this species exhibits a unique pattern in terms of start and stop codons, featuring only two types of start codons (ATG and ATT) and three types of stop codons including the incomplete T. Notably, the abundance of AT in the Second position of the codons surpasses that of the First and Third position. The gene arrangement of PCGs exhibits a relatively conserved pattern, while there exists substantial variability in tRNA. Evolutionary analysis revealed that it formed a distinct cluster with B. marianensis and exhibited relatively distant phylogenetic relationships with other sea cucumbers. Conclusions These findings contribute to the taxonomic diversity of sea cucumbers in the Elasipodida order, thereby holding significant implications for the conservation of biological genetic resources, evolutionary advancements, and the exploration of novel sea cucumber resources.
BackgroundPercocypris pingi (Tchang) was classified as Endangered on the Red List of China ' s Vertebrates in 2015 and is widely distributed in the Upper Yangtze River. Although breeding and release into wild habitats have been performed for this commercially important fish in recent years, low genetic diversity has been found in wild populations. Genomic resources are strongly recommended before formulating and carrying out conservation strategies for P. pingi. Thus, there is an urgent need to conserve germplasm resources and improve the population diversity of P. pingi. To date, the whole genome of P. pingi has not been reported.ResultsIn our study, we constructed the first chromosome-level genome of P. pingi by high-throughput chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) technology and PacBio long-read sequencing. The assembled genome was 1.7 Gb in size, with an N50 of 17,692 bp and a GC content from circular consensus sequencing of 37.67%. The Hi-C results again demonstrated that P. pingi was tetraploid (n = 98), with the genome consisting of 24-type and 25-type chromosomes. Chr.19 of the 24-type chromosomes in P. pingi resulted from the fusion of chr.19 and chr.22 in zebrafish. The divergence times between 24-type and 25-type chromosomes was around 6.1 million years ago. A total of 25,198 and 25,291 protein-coding genes were obtained from the 24-type and 25-type chromosomes, respectively. The ploidy of P. pingi is an allotetraploid. A total of 8,741 genes of P. pingi were clustered into 4,378 gene families that were shared with 14 other species, and the P. pingi genome had 68 unique gene families. Phylogenetic analyses indicated that P. pingi was most closely related to Schizothorax oconnori, and the genes were clustered on one branch. We identified 166 significantly expanded gene families and 173 significantly contracted gene families in P. pingi. The most enriched positive protein-coding genes, such as Bmp-4, Etfdh, homeobox protein HB9, and ATG3, were screened.ConclusionOur study provides a high-quality chromosome-anchored reference genome for P. pingi and provides sufficient information on the chromosomes, which will lead to valuable resources for genetic, genomic, and biological studies of P. pingi and for improving the genetic diversity, population size, and scientific conservation of endangered fish and other key cyprinid species in aquaculture.
Background The ricefield eel Monopterus albus undergoes a natural sex change from female to male during its life cycle, and previous studies have shown the potential mechanisms of this transition at the transcriptional and protein levels. However, the changes in protein levels have not been fully explored, especially in the intersexual stage. ResultsIn the present study, the protein expression patterns in the gonadal tissues from five different periods, the ovary (OV), early intersexual stage gonad (IE), middle intersexual stage gonad (IM), late intersexual stage gonad (IL), and testis (TE), were determined by untargeted proteomics sequencing. A total of 5125 proteins and 394 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were detected in the gonadal tissues. Of the 394 DEPs, there were 136 between the OV and IE groups, 20 between the IM and IE groups, 179 between the IL and IM groups, and 59 between the TE and IL groups. Three candidate proteins, insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 3 isoform X1 (Igf2bp3), triosephosphate isomerase (Tpi), and Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase isoform X1 [(Cu-Zn) Sod1], were validated by western blotting to verify the reliability of the data. Furthermore, metal metabolite-related proteins were enriched in the IL vs. IM groups and TE vs. IL groups, which had close relationships with sex change, including Cu2+-, Ca2+-, Zn2+- and Fe2+/Fe3+-related proteins. Analysis of the combined transcriptome data revealed consistent protein/mRNA expression trends for two metal metabolite-related proteins/genes [LOC109953912 and calcium Binding Protein 39 Like (cab39l)]. Notably, we detected significantly higher levels of Cu2+ during the sex change process, suggesting that Cu2+ is a male-related metal metabolite that may have an important function in male reproductive development. Conclusions In summary, we analyzed the protein profiles of ricefield eel gonadal tissues in five sexual stages (OV, IE, IM, IL, and TE) and verified the plausibility of the data. After preforming the functional enrichment of metal metabolite-related DEPs, we detected the contents of the metal metabolites Zn2+, Cu2+, Ca2+, and Fe2+/Fe3+ at these five stages and screened for (Cu-Zn) Sod1 and Mmp-9 as possible key proteins in the sex reversal process.
Most studied, investigating transcriptional changes in myocardial biopsies focus on human genes. However, the presence and potential consequence of persistent expression of viral genes within the myocardium is unclear. The aim of the study was to analyze viral gene expression in RNAseq data from endomyocardial biopsies. The NCBI Bioproject library was screened for published projects that included bulk RNA sequencing data from endomyocardial biopsies from both healthy and diseased patients with a sample size greater than 20. Diseased patients with hypertrophic, dilated, and ischemic cardiomyopathies were included. A total of 507 patients with 507 samples from 6 bioprojects were included and mapped to the human genome (hg38). Unmappable sequences were extracted and mapped to an artificial 'super-virus' genome comprising 12,182 curated viral reference genomes. Subsequently, the sequences were reiteratively permutated and mapped again to account for randomness. In total, sequences from 68 distinct viruses were found, all of which were potentially human pathogenic. No increase in cardiotropic viruses was found in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. However, the expression levels of the particle forming human endogenous retrovirus K were significantly increased (q < 0.0003, ANOVA). Higher expression levels were associated with increased expression in mitochondrial pathways such as oxidative phosphorylation (p < 0.0001). In Conclusion, expression of human endogenous retrovirus K is significantly increased in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, which in turn was associated with transcriptional alterations in major cellular pathways.
BackgroundNematodes of the genus Steinernema and their Xenorhabdus bacterial symbionts are lethal entomopathogens that are useful in the biocontrol of insect pests, as sources of diverse natural products, and as research models for mutualism and parasitism. Xenorhabdus play a central role in all aspects of the Steinernema lifecycle, and a deeper understanding of their genomes therefore has the potential to spur advances in each of these applications.ResultsHere, we report a comparative genomics analysis of Xenorhabdus griffiniae, including the symbiont of Steinernema hermaphroditum nematodes, for which genetic and genomic tools are being developed. We sequenced and assembled circularized genomes for three Xenorhabdus strains: HGB2511, ID10 and TH1. We then determined their relationships to other Xenorhabdus and delineated their species via phylogenomic analyses, concluding that HGB2511 and ID10 are Xenorhabdus griffiniae while TH1 is a novel species. These additions to the existing X. griffiniae landscape further allowed for the identification of two subspecies within the clade. Consistent with other Xenorhabdus, the analysed X. griffiniae genomes each encode a wide array of antimicrobials and virulence-related proteins. Comparative genomic analyses, including the creation of a pangenome, revealed that a large amount of the intraspecies variation in X. griffiniae is contained within the mobilome and attributable to prophage loci. In addition, CRISPR arrays, secondary metabolite potential and toxin genes all varied among strains within the X. griffiniae species.ConclusionsOur findings suggest that phage-related genes drive the genomic diversity in closely related Xenorhabdus symbionts, and that these may underlie some of the traits most associated with the lifestyle and survival of entomopathogenic nematodes and their bacteria: virulence and competition. This study establishes a broad knowledge base for further exploration of not only the relationships between X. griffiniae species and their nematode hosts but also the molecular mechanisms that underlie their entomopathogenic lifestyle.
Background Several single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) pipelines exist, each offering its own advantages. Among them and described here is vSNP that has been developed over the past decade and is specifically tailored to meet the needs of diagnostic laboratories. Laboratories that aim to provide rapid whole genome sequencing results during outbreak investigations face unique challenges. vSNP addresses these challenges by enabling users to verify and validate sequence accuracy with ease- having utility across various pathogens, being fully auditable, and presenting results that are easy to interpret and can be comprehended by individuals with diverse backgrounds.Results vSNP has proven effective for real-time phylogenetic analysis of disease outbreaks and eradication efforts, including bovine tuberculosis, brucellosis, virulent Newcastle disease, SARS-CoV-2, African swine fever, and highly pathogenic avian influenza. The pipeline produces easy-to-read SNP matrices, sorted for convenience, as well as corresponding phylogenetic trees, making the output easily understandable. Essential data for verifying SNPs is included in the output, and the process has been divided into two steps for ease of use and faster processing times. vSNP requires minimal computational resources to run and can be run in a wide range of environments. Several utilities have been developed to make analysis more accessible for subject matter experts who may not have computational expertise.Conclusion The vSNP pipeline integrates seamlessly into a diagnostic workflow and meets the criteria for quality control accreditation programs, such as 17025 by the International Organization for Standardization. Its versatility and robustness make it suitable for use with a diverse range of organisms, providing detailed, reproducible, and transparent results, making it a valuable tool in various applications, including phylogenetic analysis performed in real time.
Background Cable bacteria are filamentous members of the Desulfobulbaceae family that are capable of performing centimetre-scale electron transport in marine and freshwater sediments. This long-distance electron transport is mediated by a network of parallel conductive fibres embedded in the cell envelope. This fibre network efficiently transports electrical currents along the entire length of the centimetre-long filament. Recent analyses show that these fibres consist of metalloproteins that harbour a novel nickel-containing cofactor, which indicates that cable bacteria have evolved a unique form of biological electron transport. This nickel-dependent conduction mechanism suggests that cable bacteria are strongly dependent on nickel as a biosynthetic resource. Here, we performed a comprehensive comparative genomic analysis of the genes linked to nickel homeostasis. We compared the genome-encoded adaptation to nickel of cable bacteria to related members of the Desulfobulbaceae family and other members of the Desulfobulbales order. Results Presently, four closed genomes are available for the monophyletic cable bacteria clade that consists of the genera Candidatus Electrothrix and Candidatus Electronema. To increase the phylogenomic coverage, we additionally generated two closed genomes of cable bacteria: Candidatus Electrothrix gigas strain HY10-6 and Candidatus Electrothrix antwerpensis strain GW3-4, which are the first closed genomes of their respective species. Nickel homeostasis genes were identified in a database of 38 cable bacteria genomes (including 6 closed genomes). Gene prevalence was compared to 19 genomes of related strains, residing within the Desulfobulbales order but outside of the cable bacteria clade, revealing several genome-encoded adaptations to nickel homeostasis in cable bacteria. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that nickel importers, nickel-binding enzymes and nickel chaperones of cable bacteria are affiliated to organisms outside the Desulfobulbaceae family, with several proteins showing affiliation to organisms outside of the Desulfobacterota phylum. Conspicuously, cable bacteria encode a unique periplasmic nickel export protein RcnA, which possesses a putative cytoplasmic histidine-rich loop that has been largely expanded compared to RcnA homologs in other organisms. Conclusion Cable bacteria genomes show a clear genetic adaptation for nickel utilization when compared to closely related genera. This fully aligns with the nickel-dependent conduction mechanism that is uniquely found in cable bacteria.
Mosquitoes are prolific vectors of human pathogens, therefore a clear and accurate understanding of the organization of their antimicrobial defenses is crucial for informing the development of transmission control strategies. The canonical infection response in insects, as described in the insect model Drosophila melanogaster, is pathogen type-dependent, with distinct stereotypical responses to Gram-negative bacteria and Gram-positive bacteria/fungi mediated by the activation of the Imd and Toll pathways, respectively. To determine whether this pathogen-specific discrimination is shared by mosquitoes, we used RNAseq to capture the genome-wide transcriptional response of Aedes aegypti and Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) to systemic infection with Gram-negative bacteria, Gram-positive bacteria, yeasts, and filamentous fungi, as well as challenge with heat-killed Gram-negative, Gram-positive, and fungal pathogens. From the resulting data, we found that Ae. aegypti and An. gambiae both mount a core response to all categories of infection, and this response is highly conserved between the two species with respect to both function and orthology. When we compared the transcriptomes of mosquitoes infected with different types of bacteria, we observed that the intensity of the transcriptional response was correlated with both the virulence and growth rate of the infecting pathogen. Exhaustive comparisons of the transcriptomes of Gram-negative-challenged versus Gram-positive-challenged mosquitoes yielded no difference in either species. In Ae. aegypti, however, we identified transcriptional signatures specific to bacterial infection and to fungal infection. The bacterial infection response was dominated by the expression of defensins and cecropins, while the fungal infection response included the disproportionate upregulation of an uncharacterized family of glycine-rich proteins. These signatures were also observed in Ae. aegypti challenged with heat-killed bacteria and fungi, indicating that this species can discriminate between molecular patterns that are specific to bacteria and to fungi.
BackgroundMost skin-related traits have been studied in Caucasian genetic backgrounds. A comprehensive study on skin-associated genetic effects on underrepresented populations such as Vietnam is needed to fill the gaps in the field.ObjectivesWe aimed to develop a computational pipeline to predict the effect of genetic factors on skin traits using public data (GWAS catalogs and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data from the 1000 Genomes Project-1KGP) and in-house Vietnamese data (WGS and genotyping by SNP array). Also, we compared the genetic predispositions of 25 skin-related traits of Vietnamese population to others to acquire population-specific insights regarding skin health.MethodsVietnamese cohorts of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 1008 healthy individuals for the reference and 96 genotyping samples (which do not have any skin cutaneous issues) by Infinium Asian Screening Array-24 v1.0 BeadChip were employed to predict skin-associated genetic variants of 25 skin-related and micronutrient requirement traits in population analysis and correlation analysis. Simultaneously, we compared the landscape of cutaneous issues of Vietnamese people with other populations by assessing their genetic profiles.ResultsThe skin-related genetic profile of Vietnamese cohorts was similar at most to East Asian cohorts (JPT: Fst = 0.036, CHB: Fst = 0.031, CHS: Fst = 0.027, CDX: Fst = 0.025) in the population study. In addition, we identified pairs of skin traits at high risk of frequent co-occurrence (such as skin aging and wrinkles (r = 0.45, p = 1.50e-5) or collagen degradation and moisturizing (r = 0.35, p = 1.1e-3)).ConclusionThis is the first investigation in Vietnam to explore genetic variants of facial skin. These findings could improve inadequate skin-related genetic diversity in the currently published database.
Large-scale copy number variants (CNVs) are structural alterations in the genome that involve the duplication or deletion of DNA segments, contributing to genetic diversity and playing a crucial role in the evolution and development of various diseases and disorders, as they can lead to the dosage imbalance of one or more genes. Massively parallel sequencing (MPS) has revolutionized the field of genetic analysis and contributed significantly to routine clinical diagnosis and screening. It offers a precise method for detecting CNVs with exceptional accuracy. In this context, a non-invasive prenatal test (NIPT) based on the sequencing of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from pregnant women's plasma using a low-coverage whole genome MPS (WGS) approach represents a valuable source for population studies. Here, we analyzed genomic data of 12,732 pregnant women from the Slovak (9,230), Czech (1,583), and Hungarian (1,919) populations. We identified 5,062 CNVs ranging from 200 kbp and described their basic characteristics and differences between the subject populations. Our results suggest that re-analysis of sequencing data from routine WGS assays has the potential to obtain large-scale CNV population frequencies, which are not well known and may provide valuable information to support the classification and interpretation of this type of genetic variation. Furthermore, this could contribute to expanding knowledge about the central European genome without investing in additional laboratory work, as NIPTs are a relatively widely used screening method.
BackgroundThe polygenic risk score (PRS) is used to predict the risk of developing common complex diseases or cancers using genetic markers. Although PRS is used in clinical practice to predict breast cancer risk, it is more accurate for Europeans than for non-Europeans because of the sample size of training genome-wide association studies (GWAS). To address this disparity, we constructed a PRS model for predicting the risk of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in the Korean population.ResultsUsing GWAS analysis, we identified 43 Korean-specific variants and calculated the PRS. Subsequent to plotting receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, we selected the 31 best-performing variants to construct an optimal PRS model. The resultant PRS model with 31 variants demonstrated a prediction rate of 77.4%. The pathway analysis indicated that the identified non-coding variants are involved in regulating the expression of genes related to cancer initiation and progression. Notably, favorable lifestyle habits, such as avoiding tobacco and alcohol, mitigated the risk of RCC across PRS strata expressing genetic risk.ConclusionA Korean-specific PRS model was established to predict the risk of RCC in the underrepresented Korean population. Our findings suggest that lifestyle-associated factors influencing RCC risk are associated with acquired risk factors indirectly through epigenetic modification, even among individuals in the higher PRS category.
BackgroundHigh-quality goatskins are valuable byproducts usually produced by indigenous goat breeds with poorer production performance in Asia and Africa. However, the genetic and molecular mechanisms underpinning goatskin's biomechanical properties (e.g., tensile strength) remain elusive. Mechanistic exploration of these traits could greatly aid the genetic improvement and genetic resource conservation of native breeds in these regions. To fulfill this purpose, we collected skin tissues from three goat breeds: Huai goat (HG), a Chinese native variety producing high-quality goatskins; Yudong meat goat (YDMG), a crossbreed of HG and Boer goat; Henan dairy goat (HNDG), a dairy goat breed.ResultsScanning electronic microscopy analysis of skin tissues found that the collagen fiber diameters, collagen fibril diameters, and crimps significantly differed among the three goat breeds; however, collagen fibril diameters are similar in HG and HNDG. A sum of 230, 775, and 86 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified from YDMG versus HNDG, HG versus HNDG, and YDMG versus HG, respectively. Functional enrichment analysis suggested that signaling pathways involved in fatty acid, retinol, steroid metabolisms, and GO items related to the physical properties of the skin (e.g., collagen-containing extracellular matrix) are significantly overrepresented in DEGs identified from meat versus dairy goats. Furthermore, 106 DEGs (e.g., COL1A1, COL1A2, and SPARC) showed specific expression patterns in HG and YDMG versus HNDG. Items about biophysical features of skin (e.g., extracellular matrix organization and ECM proteoglycans) are markedly enriched. Protein-protein interaction analysis suggested that two growth factors (IGF1 and PDGFD) are latent collagen and other ECM protein expression modulators.ConclusionUltrastructural analysis of goat skin tissues suggested that collagen fibril diameter is not a major factor affecting goatskin quality. Transcriptomic profiles unveiled core genes and associated biological processes potentially involved in regulating goatskin quality. These discoveries shined new light on deeper understanding the mechanisms of hide-related traits in goat and other livestock.
BackgroundThe Testis is an important reproductive organ in male mammals and the site for spermatogenesis, androgen synthesis, and secretion. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) play an important regulatory role in various biological processes. However, the regulatory role of ncRNAs in the development of yak testes and spermatogenesis remains largely unclear.ResultIn this study, we compared the expression profiles of circular RNAs (circRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs), and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in yak testicular tissue samples collected at 6 months (Y6M), 18 months (Y18M), and 4 years (Y4Y). Using RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), we observed a significant difference in the expression patterns of ncRNAs in the samples collected at different testicular development stages. Twenty-two differentially expressed (DE) circRNAs, 69 DE miRNAs, and 64 DE mRNAs were detected in Y6M, Y18M, and Y4Y testicular samples, respectively. The results of gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses showed that the source genes of DE circRNAs, predicted target genes of DE miRNAs, and DE mRNAs were specifically associated with signaling pathways and GO terms that were related to sperm synthesis, sperm vitality, and testicular development, such as cell cycle, Wnt signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, GnRH signaling pathway, and spermatogenesis. The analysis of the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network revealed that some DE ncRNAs, including miR-574, miR-449a, CDC42, and CYP11A1, among others, may be involved in testicular spermatogenesis. Concurrently, various circRNA-miRNA interaction pairs were observed.ConclusionOur findings provide a database of circRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs expression profiles in testicular tissue of yaks at different developmental stages and a detailed understanding of the regulatory network of ncRNAs in yak testicular development and provide data that can help elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying yak testicular development.
Background Wheat grain endosperm is mainly composed of proteins and starch. The contents and the overall composition of seed storage proteins (SSP) markedly affect the processing quality of wheat flour. Polyploidization results in duplicated chromosomes, and the genomes are often unstable and may result in a large number of gene losses and gene rearrangements. However, the instability of the genome itself, as well as the large number of duplicated genes generated during polyploidy, is an important driving force for genetic innovation. In this study, we compared the differences in starch and SSP, and analyzed the transcriptome and metabolome among Aegilops sharonensis (R7), durum wheat (Z636) and amphidiploid (Z636xR7) to reveal the effects of polyploidization on the synthesis of seed reserve polymers. Results The total starch and amylose content of Z636xR7 was significantly higher than R7 and lower than Z636. The gliadin and glutenin contents of Z636xR7 were higher than those in Z636 and R7. Through transcriptome analysis, there were 21,037, 2197, 15,090 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the three comparison groups of R7 vs Z636, Z636 vs Z636xR7, and Z636xR7 vs R7, respectively, which were mainly enriched in carbon metabolism and amino acid biosynthesis pathways. Transcriptome data and qRT-PCR were combined to analyze the expression levels of genes related to storage polymers. It was found that the expression levels of some starch synthase genes, namely AGP-L, AGP-S and GBSSI in Z636xR7 were higher than in R7 and among the 17 DEGs related to storage proteins, the expression levels of 14 genes in R7 were lower than those in Z636 and Z636xR7. According to the classification analysis of all differential metabolites, most belonged to carboxylic acids and derivatives, and fatty acyls were enriched in the biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, niacin and nicotinamide metabolism, one-carbon pool by folate, etc. Conclusion After allopolyploidization, the expression of genes related to starch synthesis was down-regulated in Z636xR7, and the process of starch synthesis was inhibited, resulting in delayed starch accumulation and prolongation of the seed development process. Therefore, at the same development time point, the starch accumulation of Z636xR7 lagged behind that of Z636. In this study, the expression of the GSe2 gene in Z636xR7 was higher than that of the two parents, which was beneficial to protein synthesis, and increased the protein content. These results eventually led to changes in the synthesis of seed reserve polymers. The current study provided a basis for a greater in-depth understanding of the mechanism of wheat allopolyploid formation and its stable preservation, and also promoted the effective exploitation of high-value alleles.
Background The closed poultry houses integrated with a longitudinal water curtain cooling system (LWCCS) are widely used in modern poultry production. This study showed the variations in environmental conditions in closed houses integrated with a longitudinal water curtain cooling system. We evaluated the influence of different environmental conditions on duck growth performance and the transcriptome changes of immune organs, including the bursa of Fabricius and the spleen. Result This study investigated the slaughter indicators and immune organ transcriptomes of 52-day-old Cherry Valley ducks by analyzing the LWCC at different locations (water curtain end, middle position, and fan cooling end). The results showed that the cooling effect of the LWCCS was more evident from 10:00 a.m. -14:00. And from the water curtain end to the fan cooling end, the hourly average temperature differently decreased by 0.310degree celsius, 0.450degree celsius, 0.480degree celsius, 0.520degree celsius, and 0.410degree celsius, respectively (P < 0.05). The daily and hourly average relative humidity decreased from the water curtain end to the fan cooling end, dropping by 7.500% and 8.200%, respectively (P < 0.01). We also observed differences in production performance, such as dressing weight, half-eviscerated weight, skin fat rate, and percentage of abdominal fat (P < 0.01), which may have been caused by environmental conditions. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) revealed 211 and 279 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the ducks' bursa of Fabricius and spleen compared between the water curtain end and fan cooling end, respectively. The Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis of the two organs showed the DEGs were mainly enriched in cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, integral component of membrane, Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs) signaling pathway, etc. Our results implied that full-closed poultry houses integrated with LWCCS could potentially alter micro-environments (water curtain vs. fan cooling), resulting in ducks experiencing various stressful situations that eventually affect their immunity and production performance. Conclusion In this study, our results indicated that uneven distributions of longitudinal environmental factors caused by LWCCS would affect the dressed weight, breast muscle weight, skin fat rate, and other product performance. Moreover, the expression of immune-related genes in the spleen and bursa of ducks could be affected by the LWCCS. This provides a new reference to optimize the use of LWCCS in conjunction with close duck houses in practical production.
BackgroundThermal stress is a major environmental factor affecting fish development and survival. Common carp (Cyprinus carpio) are susceptible to heat stress in their embryonic and larval phases, but the thermal stress response of alternative splicing during common carp embryogenesis remains poorly understood.ResultsUsing RNA-seq data from eight developmental stages and four temperatures, we constructed a comprehensive profile of alternative splicing (AS) during the embryogenesis of common carp, and found that AS genes and events are widely distributed among all stages. A total of 5,835 developmental stage-specific AS (SAS) genes, 21,368 temperature-specific differentially expressed genes (TDEGs), and 2,652 temperature-specific differentially AS (TDAS) genes were identified. Hub TDAS genes in each developmental stage, such as taf2, hnrnpa1, and drg2, were identified through protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis. The early developmental stages may be more sensitive to temperature, with thermal stress leading to a massive increase in the number of expressed transcripts, TDEGs, and TDAS genes in the morula stage, followed by the gastrula stage. GO and KEGG analyses showed that from the morula stage to the neurula stage, TDAS genes were more involved in intracellular transport, protein modification, and localization processes, while from the optic vesicle stage to one day post-hatching, they participated more in biosynthetic processes. Further subgenomic analysis revealed that the number of AS genes and events in subgenome B was generally higher than that in subgenome A, and the homologous AS genes were significantly enriched in basic life activity pathways, such as mTOR signaling pathway, p53 signaling pathway, and MAPK signaling pathway. Additionally, lncRNAs can play a regulatory role in the response to thermal stress by targeting AS genes such as lmnl3, affecting biological processes such as apoptosis and axon guidance.ConclusionsIn short, thermal stress can affect alternative splicing regulation during common carp embryogenesis at multiple levels. Our work complemented some gaps in the study of alternative splicing at both levels of embryogenesis and thermal stress in C. carpio and contributed to the comprehension of environmental adaptation formation in polyploid fishes during embryogenesis.
BackgroundThe Hengduan Mountains, one of the global biodiversity hotspots with exceptional species richness and high endemism, contains numerous arid valleys that create a distinctive geographical and ecological landscape. However, the adaptive evolutionary mechanisms of organism in the arid valley remain poorly understood. Minois aurata, an endemic butterfly species found exclusively in the arid valley of the upper Minjiang River, represents an attractive model system for studying adaptive evolutionary mechanisms to arid valley environments.ResultsHere, we present the first chromosome-level genome assembly for Minois aurata, with a total size of approximately 609.17 Mb, and a scaffold N50 size of 23.88 Mb. These scaffolds were further clustered and anchored onto 29 chromosomes based on Hi-C data. A total of 16,163 protein-coding genes were predicted, of which 91.83% were functionally annotated. The expansion of transposable elements (TEs) accounts for the relatively large genome size of M. aurata, potentially aiding its adaptation to environmental conditions. Phylogenomic analyses based on 3,785 single-copy genes revealed that M. aurata is most closely related to Hipparchia semele. Further mitochondrial genome analysis of four Minois species placed M. aurata in a basal position within the genus, supporting it as an independent species. A total of 185 rapidly evolving and 232 specific gene families were identified in M. aurata. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that these gene families were mainly associated with ultraviolet radiation, heat and hypoxia responses. We also identified 234 positive selected genes in M. aurata, some of which are related to compound eye photoreceptor development, osmotic stress, and light stimulus response. Demographic analysis indicated that the effective population size of M. aurata decreased around 0.4 and 0.04 million years ago, respectively, coinciding with the localized sub-glaciation.ConclusionThe chromosome-level genome offers a comprehensive genomic basis for understanding the evolutionary and adaptive strategies of Minois aurata in the unique arid valley environment of the Hengduan Mountains, while also providing valuable insights into the broader mechanisms of organism adaptation to such habitats.
BackgroundEssential genes encode functions that play a vital role in the life activities of organisms, encompassing growth, development, immune system functioning, and cell structure maintenance. Conventional experimental techniques for identifying essential genes are resource-intensive and time-consuming, and the accuracy of current machine learning models needs further enhancement. Therefore, it is crucial to develop a robust computational model to accurately predict essential genes.ResultsIn this study, we introduce GCNN-SFM, a computational model for identifying essential genes in organisms, based on graph convolutional neural networks (GCNN). GCNN-SFM integrates a graph convolutional layer, a convolutional layer, and a fully connected layer to model and extract features from gene sequences of essential genes. Initially, the gene sequence is transformed into a feature map using coding techniques. Subsequently, a multi-layer GCN is employed to perform graph convolution operations, effectively capturing both local and global features of the gene sequence. Further feature extraction is performed, followed by integrating convolution and fully-connected layers to generate prediction results for essential genes. The gradient descent algorithm is utilized to iteratively update the cross-entropy loss function, thereby enhancing the accuracy of the prediction results. Meanwhile, model parameters are tuned to determine the optimal parameter combination that yields the best prediction performance during training.ConclusionsExperimental evaluation demonstrates that GCNN-SFM surpasses various advanced essential gene prediction models and achieves an average accuracy of 94.53%. This study presents a novel and effective approach for identifying essential genes, which has significant implications for biology and genomics research.
Background The Bucephalidae is a large family of digenean trematodes but most previous analyses of its phylogenetic position have relied on a single mitochondrial gene or morphological features. Mitochondrial genomes (mitogenomes) remain unavailable for the entire family. To address this, we sequenced the complete mitogenome of Dollfustrema vaneyi and analyzed the phylogenetic relationships with other trematodes. Results The circular genome of Dollfustrema vaneyi spanned 14,959 bp and contained 12 protein-coding genes, 22 transfer RNA genes, 2 ribosomal RNA genes, and a major non-coding region. We used concatenated amino acid and nucleotide sequences of all 36 genes for phylogenetic analyses, conducted using MrBayes, IQ-TREE and PhyloBayes. We identified pronounced topological instability across different analyses. The addition of recently sequenced two mitogenomes for the Aspidogastrea subclass along with the use of a site-heterogeneous model stabilized the topology, particularly the positions of Azygiidae and Bucephalidae. The stabilized results indicated that Azygiidae was the closest lineage to Bucephalidae in the available dataset, and together, they clustered at the base of the Plagiorchiida. Conclusions Our study provides the first comprehensive description and annotation of the mitochondrial genome for the Bucephalidae family. The results indicate a close phylogenetic relationship between Azygiidae and Bucephalidae, and reveal their basal placement within the order Plagiorchiida. Furthermore, the inclusion of Aspidogastrea mitogenomes and the site-heterogeneous model significantly improved the topological stability. These data will provide key molecular resources for future taxonomic and phylogenetic studies of the family Bucephalidae.
Background Largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) has significant economic value as a high-yielding fish species in China's freshwater aquaculture industry. Determining the major genes related to growth traits and identifying molecular markers associated with these traits serve as the foundation for breeding strategies involving gene pyramiding. In this study, we screened restriction-site associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq) data to identify single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci potentially associated with extreme growth differences between fast-growth and slow-growth groups in the F1 generation of a largemouth bass population.Results We subsequently identified associations between these loci and specific candidate genes related to four key growth traits (body weight, body length, body height, and body thickness) based on SNP genotyping. In total, 4,196,486 high-quality SNPs were distributed across 23 chromosomes. Using a population-specific genotype frequency threshold of 0.7, we identified 30 potential SNPs associated with growth traits. Among the 30 SNPs, SNP19140160, SNP9639603, SNP9639605, and SNP23355498 showed significant associations; three of them (SNP9639603, SNP9639605, and SNP23355498) were significantly associated with one trait, body length, in the F1 generation, and one (SNP19140160) was significantly linked with four traits (body weight, height, length, and thickness) in the F1 generation. The markers SNP19140160 and SNP23355498 were located near two growth candidate genes, fam174b and ppip5k1b, respectively, and these candidate genes were closely linked with growth, development, and feeding. The average body weight of the group with four dominant genotypes at these SNP loci in the F1 generation population (703.86 g) was 19.63% higher than that of the group without dominant genotypes at these loci (588.36 g).Conclusions Thus, these four markers could be used to construct a population with dominant genotypes at loci related to fast growth. These findings demonstrate how markers can be used to identify genes related to fast growth, and will be useful for molecular marker-assisted selection in the breeding of high-quality largemouth bass.
Background Splicing variants are a major class of pathogenic mutations, with their severity equivalent to nonsense mutations. However, redundant and degenerate splicing signals hinder functional assessments of sequence variations within introns, particularly at branch sites. We have established a massively parallel splicing assay to assess the impact on splicing of 11,191 disease-relevant variants. Based on the experimental results, we then applied regression-based methods to identify factors determining splicing decisions and their respective weights.Results Our statistical modeling is highly sensitive, accurately annotating the splicing defects of near-exon intronic variants, outperforming state-of-the-art predictive tools. We have incorporated the algorithm and branchpoint information into a web-based tool, SpliceAPP, to provide an interactive application. This user-friendly website allows users to upload any genetic variants with genome coordinates (e.g., chr15 74,687,208 A G), and the tool will output predictions for splicing error scores and evaluate the impact on nearby splice sites. Additionally, users can query branch site information within the region of interest.Conclusions In summary, SpliceAPP represents a pioneering approach to screening pathogenic intronic variants, contributing to the development of precision medicine. It also facilitates the annotation of splicing motifs. SpliceAPP is freely accessible using the link https://bc.imb.sinica.edu.tw/SpliceAPP. Source code can be downloaded at https://github.com/hsinnan75/SpliceAPP.
BackgroundDNA damage repair (DDR) may affect tumorigenesis and therapeutic response in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Long noncoding RNAs (LncRNAs) can regulate DDR and play a vital role in maintaining genomic stability in cancers. Here, we identified a DDR-related prognostic signature in HCC and explored its potential clinical value.MethodsData of HCC samples were obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and a list of DDR-related genes was extracted from the Molecular Signatures database (MSigDB). A DDR-related lncRNAs signature associated to overall survival (OS) was constructed using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator-cox regression, and was further validated by the Kaplan-Meier curve and receiver operating characteristic curve. A nomogram integrating other clinical risk factors was established. Moreover, the relationships between the signature with somatic mutation, immune landscape and drug sensitivity were explored.ResultsThe prognostic model of 5 DDR-related lncRNAs was constructed and classified patients into two risk groups at median cut-off. The low-risk group had a better OS, and the signature was an independent prognostic indicator in HCC. A nomogram of the signature combined with TNM stage was constructed. TP53 gene was more frequently mutated in the high-risk group. Marked differences in immune cells were observed, such as CD4 + T cells, NK cells and macrophages, between the two groups. Moreover, an increase in the expression of immune checkpoint molecules was found in the high-risk group. The low-risk group presented with a significantly higher response to sorafenib or cisplatin. Finally, potential value of this signature was validated in real-world HCC patients.ConclusionOur findings provided a promising insight into DDR-related lncRNAs in HCC and a personalized prediction tool for prognosis and therapeutic response.
Background The popularity of Muscovy ducks is attributed not only to their conformation traits but also to their slightly higher content of breast and leg meat, as well as their stronger-tasting meat compared to that of typical domestic ducks. However, there is a lack of comprehensive systematic research on the development of breast muscle in Muscovy ducks. In addition, since the number of skeletal muscle myofibers is established during the embryonic period, this study conducted a full-length transcriptome sequencing and microRNA sequencing of the breast muscle. Muscovy ducks at four developmental stages, namely Embryonic Day 21 (E21), Embryonic Day 27 (E27), Hatching Day (D0), and Post-hatching Day 7 (D7), were used to isolate total RNA for analysis.Results A total of 68,161 genes and 472 mature microRNAs were identified. In order to uncover deeper insights into the regulation of mRNA by miRNAs, we conducted an integration of the differentially expressed miRNAs (known as DEMs) with the differentially expressed genes (referred to as DEGs) across various developmental stages. This integration allowed us to make predictions regarding the interactions between miRNAs and mRNA. Through this analysis, we identified a total of 274 DEGs that may serve as potential targets for the 68 DEMs. In the predicted miRNA-mRNA interaction networks, let-7b, miR-133a-3p, miR-301a-3p, and miR-338-3p were the hub miRNAs. In addition, multiple DEMs also showed predicted target relationships with the DEGs associated with skeletal system development. These identified DEGs and DEMs as well as their predicted interaction networks involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis and muscle development were most likely to play critical roles in facilitating the embryo-to-hatchling transition. A candidate miRNA, miR-301a-3p, exhibited increased expression during the differentiation of satellite cells and was downregulated in the breast muscle tissues of Muscovy ducks at E21 compared to E27. A dual-luciferase reporter assay suggested that the ANKRD1 gene, which encodes a transcription factor, is a direct target of miR-301a-3p.Conclusions miR-301a-3p suppressed the posttranscriptional activity of ANKRD1, which is an activator of satellite cell proliferation, as determined with gain- and loss-of-function experiments. miR-301a-3p functions as an inducer of myogenesis by targeting the ANKRD1 gene in Muscovy ducks. These results provide novel insights into the early developmental process of black Muscovy breast muscles and will improve understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms.
BackgroundQuinoa, as a new food crop, has attracted extensive attention at home and abroad. However, the natural disaster of spike germination seriously threatens the quality and yield of quinoa. Currently, there are limited reports on the molecular mechanisms associated with spike germination in quinoa.ResultsIn this study, we utilized transcriptome sequencing technology and successfully obtained 154.51 Gb of high-quality data with a comparison efficiency of more than 88%, which fully demonstrates the extremely high reliability of the sequencing results and lays a solid foundation for subsequent analysis. Using these data, we constructed a weighted gene co-expression network (WGCNA) related to starch, sucrose, alpha-amylase, and phenolic acid metabolites, and screened six co-expression modules closely related to spike germination traits. Two of the modules associated with physiological indicators were analyzed in depth, and nine core genes were finally predicted. Further functional annotation revealed four key transcription factors involved in the regulation of dormancy and germination processes: gene LOC110698065, gene LOC110696037, gene LOC110736224, and gene LOC110705759, belonging to the bHLH, NF-YA, MYB, and FAR1 gene families, respectively.ConclusionsThese results provide clues to identify the core genes involved in quinoa spike germination. This will ultimately provide a theoretical basis for breeding new quinoa varieties with resistance.
BackgroundCircadian rhythm is crucial to the function of the immune system. Disorders of the circadian rhythm can contribute to inflammatory diseases such as Ulcerative colitis (UC). This Mendelian Randomization (MR) analysis applies genetic tools to represent the aggregated statistical results of exposure to circadian rhythm disorders and UC and its comorbidities, allowing for causal inferences.MethodsSummary statistics of protein, DNA methylation and gene expression quantitative trait loci in individuals of European ancestry (pQTL, mQTL, and eQTL, respectively) were used. Genetic variants located within or near 152 circadian clock-related genes and closely related to circadian rhythm disorders were selected as instrumental variables. Causal relationships with UC and its comorbidities were then estimated through employed Summary data-based Mendelian Randomization (SMR) and Inverse-Variance-Weighted MR (IVW-MR).ResultsThrough preliminary SMR analysis, we identified a potential causal relationship between circadian clock-related genes and UC along with its comorbidities, which was further confirmed by IVW-MR analysis. Our study identified strong evidence of positive correlation involving seven overlapping genes (CSNK1E, OPRL1, PIWIL2, RORC, MAX, PPP5C, and AANAT) through MWAS and TWAS in UC, four overlapping genes (OPRL1, CHRNB2, FBXL17, and SIRT1) in UC with PSC, and three overlapping genes (ARNTL, USP7, and KRAS) in UC with arthropathy.ConclusionsThis SMR study demonstrates the causal effect of circadian rhythm disorders in UC and its comorbidities. Furthermore, our investigation pinpointed candidate genes that could potentially serve as drug targets.
BackgroundSilkie is a traditional Chinese chicken breed characterized by its unique combination of specialized morphological traits. While previous studies have focused on the genetic basis of these traits, the overall genomic characteristics of the Silkie breed remain largely unexplored. In this study, we employed whole genome resequencing data to examine the genetic diversity, selective signals and demographic history of the Silkie breed through comparative analyses with seven other Chinese indigenous breeds (IDGBs), a commercial breed, and the wild ancestor Red Jungle Fowl.ResultsIn total, 20.8 million high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms and 86 large structural variations were obtained. We discovered that Silkie exhibits a relatively high level of inbreeding and is genetically distinct from other IDGBs. Furthermore, our analysis indicated that Silkie has experienced a stronger historical population bottleneck and has a smaller effective population size compared with other IDGBs. We identified 45 putatively selected genes that are enriched in the melanogenesis pathway, which probably is related to the feather color. Among these genes, LMBR1 and PDSS2 have been previously associated with the extra toe and the hookless feathers, respectively. Six of the selected genes (KITLG, GSK3B, SOBP, CTBP1, ELMO2, SNRPN) are known to be associated with neurodevelopment and mental diseases in human, and are possibly related to the distinct behavior of Silkie. We further identified structural variants in Silkie and found previously reported variants linked to hyperpigmentation (END3), muff and beard (HOXB8), and Rose-comb phenotype (MNR2). Additionally, we found a 0.61 Mb inversion overlapping with the GMDS gene, which was previously linked to neurodevelopmental defects in zebrafish and humans. This may also be related to the behavior distinctiveness of Silkie.ConclusionsOur study revealed that Silkie is genetically distinct and relatively highly inbred compared to other IDGB chicken populations, possibly attributed to more prolong population bottlenecks and selective breeding practice. These results enhance our understanding of how domestication and selective breeding have shaped the genome of Silkie. These findings contribute to the broader field of domestication and avian genomics, and have implications for the future conservation and breeding efforts.
In this research, a self-developed panel comprising 22 X chromosomal multi-InDels and one X-STR was used to explore the genetic polymorphisms and forensic characteristics of these loci in Guizhou Miao and Guizhou Bouyei populations. Besides, genetic affiliations among Guizhou Miao, Guizhou Bouyei and Guizhou Han populations were investigated using principal component analysis, STRUCTURE and machine learning methods. The findings indicated that these loci in the male and female samples had comprehensive discrimination powers greater than 0.999999999. Meanwhile, the cumulative mean exclusion chance of these 23 loci for trio and duo cases were also greater than 0.9999 in Guizhou Miao and Guizhou Bouyei populations. Population genetic analyses of three Guizhou populations revealed that there were relatively low genetic divergences among these populations based on the self-constructed panel. In conclusion, this system could be utilized as the valuable tool for forensic personal identification and parentage testing in Guizhou Miao and Guizhou Bouyei populations.
Background Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a novel kind of non-coding RNAs proved to play crucial roles in the development of multiple diabetic complications. However, their expression and function in diabetes mellitus (DM)-impaired salivary glands are unknown. Results By using microarray technology, 663 upregulated and 999 downregulated circRNAs companied with 813 upregulated and 525 downregulated mRNAs were identified in the parotid glands (PGs) of type2 DM mice under a 2-fold change and P < 0.05 cutoff criteria. Gene ontology (GO) and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) analysis of upregulated mRNAs showed enrichments in immune system process and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling pathway. Infiltration of inflammatory cells and increased inflammatory cytokines were observed in diabetic PGs. Seven differently expressed circRNAs validated by qRT-PCR were selected for coding-non-coding gene co-expression (CNC) and competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) networks analysis. PPAR signaling pathway was primarily enriched through analysis of circRNA-mRNA networks. Moreover, the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA networks highlighted an enrichment in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton. Conclusion The inflammatory response is elevated in diabetic PGs. The selected seven distinct circRNAs may attribute to the injury of diabetic PG by modulating inflammatory response through PPAR signaling pathway and actin cytoskeleton in diabetic PGs.
Background Current evidence suggests a significant association between metabolites and ovarian cancer (OC); however, the causal relationship between the two remains unclear. This study employs Mendelian randomization (MR) to investigate the causal effects between different metabolites and OC.Methods In this study, a total of 637 metabolites were selected as the exposure variables from the Genome-wide Association Study (GWAS) database (http://gwas.mrcieu.ac.uk/datasets/). The OC related GWAS dataset (ieu-b-4963) was chosen as the outcome variable. R software and the TwoSampleMR package were utilized for the analysis in this study. MR analysis employed the inverse variance-weighted method (IVW), MR-Egger and weighted median (WM) for regression fitting, taking into consideration potential biases caused by linkage disequilibrium and weak instrument variables. Metabolites that did not pass the tests for heterogeneity and horizontal pleiotropy were considered to have no significant causal effect on the outcome. Steiger's upstream test was used to determine the causal direction between the exposure and outcome variables.Results The results from IVW analysis revealed that a total of 31 human metabolites showed a significant causal effect on OC (P < 0.05). Among them, 9 metabolites exhibited consistent and stable causal effects, which were confirmed by Steiger's upstream test (P < 0.05). Among these 9 metabolites, Androsterone sulfate, Propionylcarnitine, 5alpha-androstan-3beta,17beta-diol disulfate, Total lipids in medium VLDL and Concentration of medium VLDL particles demonstrated a significant positive causal effect on OC, indicating that these metabolites promote the occurrence of OC. On the other hand, X-12,093, Octanoylcarnitine, N2,N2-dimethylguanosine, and Cis-4-decenoyl carnitine showed a significant negative causal association with OC, suggesting that these metabolites can inhibit the occurrence of OC.Conclusions The study revealed the complex effect of metabolites on OC through Mendelian randomization. As promising biomarkers, these metabolites are worthy of further clinical validation.
Grain copper (Cu) concentrations represent a qualitative trait mainly controlled by genetic factors, which may differ between wheat varieties from the Sichuan Basin of China and other areas. However, the differences are poorly understood. Here, we investigated the grain Cu concentration in a remaining heterozygous line population derived from a multiparental recombinant inbred line. The grain Cu concentration varied from 4.25 to 13.44 mg/kg and 3.32 to 7.74 mg/kg over a two-year investigation, and the broad-sense heritability was 0.67. Bulked-segregation analysis revealed three quantitative trait loci on chromosomes 2A (QGr_Cu_Conc-2A), 2B (QGr_Cu_Conc-2B), and 4D (QGr_Cu_Conc-4D). QGr_Cu_Conc-2B is a novel locus, which was further narrowed between KASP-52.32 and KASP-56.57 with an interval of 52.32-56.57 Mb, explaining 17.10% of the phenotypic variation; its potential candidate gene was TraesCS2B03G0196500, encoding a chloroplast thylakoid lumen protein. KASP-52.32 successfully genotyped two common wheat populations, and the grain Cu concentration of CC genotype varieties was significantly higher than that of TT genotype varieties. Meanwhile, the concentrations of chlorophyll and the expression levels of three TaZIP8 and two TaZIP9 in flag leaves were higher in plants with high grain Cu concentration than in plants with low grain Cu concentration. These results provide guidance for understanding the genetic mechanisms underlying grain Cu concentration and may aid in wheat breeding.
Background The genetic basis underlying spawning abilities in the Pacific white shrimp, Penaeus vannamei, remains largely unexplored. To investigate genetic variations potentially related to reproductive performance, a systematic bioinformatic analysis was conducted to identify structural variations (SVs) with different polymorphic spectra in P. vannamei with high fertility (HF) and low fertility (LF). Results A total of 2,323 and 1,859 SV events were identified exclusively in the HF and LF groups, respectively. These SVs were mapped to 277 genes in the HF group and 231 genes in the LF group. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis based on SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphism) and SVs revealed several neural-related processes, suggesting the importance of neural regulation in reproduction. Notably, we identified a set of promising genes, including Cttn, Spast, Ppp4c, Spire1, Lhcgr, and Ftz-f1, which may enhance fertility in shrimp. Conclusion In conclusion, this study is the first to establish a link between SVs and reproductive traits in P. vannamei. The promising genes discovered have the potential to serve as crucial markers for enhancing reproductive traits through targeted genotyping.
BackgroundHeat stress (HS) is an increasing threat for pig production with a wide range of impacts. When submitted to high temperatures, pigs will use a variety of strategies to alleviate the effect of HS. While systemic adaptations are well known, tissue-specific changes remain poorly understood. In this study, thirty-two pigs were submitted to a 5-day HS at 32 degrees C.ResultsTranscriptomic and metabolomic analyses were performed on several tissues. The results revealed differentially expressed genes and metabolites in different tissues. Specifically, 481, 1774, 71, 1572, 17, 164, and 169 genes were differentially expressed in muscle, adipose tissue, liver, blood, thyroid, pituitary, and adrenal glands, respectively. Regulatory glands (pituitary, thyroid, and adrenal) had a lower number of regulated genes, perhaps indicating an earlier sensitivity to HS. In addition, 7, 8, 2, and 8 metabolites were differentially produced in muscle, liver, plasma, and urine, respectively. The study also focused on the oxidative stress pathway in muscle and liver by performing a correlation analysis between genes and metabolites.ConclusionsThis study has identified various adaptation mechanisms in swine that enable them to cope with heat stress (HS). These mechanisms include a global decrease in energetic metabolism, as well as changes in metabolic precursors that are linked with protein and lipid catabolism and anabolism. Notably, the adaptation mechanisms differ significantly between regulatory (pituitary, thyroid and adrenal glands) and effector tissues (muscle, adipose tissue, liver and blood). Our findings provide new insights into the comprehension of HS adaptation mechanisms in swine.
BackgroundTransitions from sexual to asexual reproduction are common in eukaryotes, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly known. The pea aphid-Acyrthosiphon pisum-exhibits reproductive polymorphism, with cyclical parthenogenetic and obligate parthenogenetic lineages, offering an opportunity to decipher the genetic basis of sex loss. Previous work on this species identified a single 840 kb region controlling reproductive polymorphism and carrying 32 genes. With the aim of identifying the gene(s) responsible for sex loss and the resulting consequences on the genetic programs controlling sexual or asexual embryogenesis, we compared the transcriptomic response to photoperiod shortening-the main sex-inducing cue-of a sexual and an obligate asexual lineage of the pea aphid, focusing on heads (where the photoperiodic cue is detected) and embryos (the final target of the cue).ResultsOur analyses revealed that four genes (one expressed in the head, and three in the embryos) of the region responded differently to photoperiod in the two lineages. We also found that the downstream genetic programs expressed during embryonic development of a future sexual female encompass similar to 1600 genes, among which miRNAs, piRNAs and histone modification pathways are overrepresented. These genes mainly co-localize in two genomic regions enriched in transposable elements (TEs).ConclusionsOur results suggest that the causal polymorphism(s) in the 840 kb region somehow impair downstream epigenetic and post-transcriptional regulations in obligate asexual lineages, thereby sustaining asexual reproduction.
Conifers are long-lived and slow-evolving, thus requiring effective defences against their fast-evolving insect natural enemies. The copy number variation (CNV) of two key acetophenone biosynthesis genes Ugt5/Ugt5b and beta glu-1 may provide a plausible mechanism underlying the constitutively variable defence in white spruce (Picea glauca) against its primary defoliator, spruce budworm. This study develops a long-insert sequence capture probe set (Picea_hung_p1.0) for quantifying copy number of beta glu-1-like, Ugt5-like genes and single-copy genes on 38 Norway spruce (Picea abies) and 40 P. glauca individuals from eight and nine provenances across Europe and North America respectively. We developed local assemblies (Piabi_c1.0 and Pigla_c.1.0), full-length transcriptomes (PIAB_v1 and PIGL_v1), and gene models to characterise the diversity of beta glu-1 and Ugt5 genes. We observed very large copy numbers of beta glu-1, with up to 381 copies in a single P. glauca individual. We observed among-provenance CNV of beta glu-1 in P. glauca but not P. abies. Ugt5b was predominantly single-copy in both species. This study generates critical hypotheses for testing the emergence and mechanism of extreme CNV, the dosage effect on phenotype, and the varying copy number of genes with the same pathway. We demonstrate new approaches to overcome experimental challenges in genomic research in conifer defences.
NF-Y is a class of heterotrimeric transcription factor composed of three subunits; NF-YA, NF-YB, and NF-YC. This complex binds to the CCAAT box found in eukaryotic promoters and is involved in the plant development and proliferation at various stages. Although many studies were conducted on NF-Y gene family in various species, but no study has been reported yet in switchgrass (Panicum virgatum L.). In this study, 47 PvNF-Y genes (17 PvNF-YA, 18 PvNF-YB, and 12 PvNF-YC) have been identified and named according to their subfamily. Chromosome location analysis revealed that all 47 PvNF-Y genes are randomly distributed across nine chromosomes. Moreover, multiple sequence alignment showed the DNA-binding domain and NF-YA/NFYB interacting domains flanking with non-conserved domains. In addition, prediction of functional similarities among PvNF-Ys genes phylogenetic tree was constructed corresponding to Arabidopsis. The gene structure, conserved domains and motifs analysis of PvNF-Ys genes demonstrated their specificity and functional conservation. Cis-regulatory elements analysis identified numerous key CREs that are significantly associated with light, hormone, stress and plant development responses. Expression profiling indicated higher expression levels of many PvNF-YA genes during drought and heat stress. Additionally, qRT-PCR analysis showed that some PvNF-Ys genes have high expression level in root. In conclusion, the findings of this study could provide a foundation for further cloning and functional analysis of NF-Y genes in switchgrass.
BackgroundTranscriptomes present a rich, multi-dimensional subset of genomics data. They provide broad insights into genetic sequence, and more significantly gene expression, across biological samples. This technology is frequently employed for describing the genetic response to experimental conditions and has created vast libraries of datasets which shed light on gene function across different tissues, diseases, diets and developmental stages in many species. However, public accessibility of these data is impeded by a lack of suitable software interfaces and databases with which to locate and analyse them.BodyHere we present an update on the status of CrustyBase.org, an online resource for analysing and sharing crustacean transcriptome datasets. Since its release in October 2020, the resource has provided many thousands of transcriptome sequences and expression profiles to its users and received 19 new dataset imports from researchers across the globe. In this article we discuss user analytics which point towards the utilization of this resource. The architecture of the application has proven robust with over 99.5% uptime and effective reporting of bugs through both user engagement and the error logging mechanism.We also introduce several new features that have been developed as part of a new release of CrustyBase.org. Two significant features are described in detail, which allow users to navigate through transcripts directly by submission of transcript identifiers, and then more broadly by searching for encoded protein domains by keyword. The latter is a novel and experimental feature, and grants users the ability to curate gene families from any dataset hosted on CrustyBase in a matter of minutes. We present case studies to demonstrate the utility of these features.BodyHere we present an update on the status of CrustyBase.org, an online resource for analysing and sharing crustacean transcriptome datasets. Since its release in October 2020, the resource has provided many thousands of transcriptome sequences and expression profiles to its users and received 19 new dataset imports from researchers across the globe. In this article we discuss user analytics which point towards the utilization of this resource. The architecture of the application has proven robust with over 99.5% uptime and effective reporting of bugs through both user engagement and the error logging mechanism.We also introduce several new features that have been developed as part of a new release of CrustyBase.org. Two significant features are described in detail, which allow users to navigate through transcripts directly by submission of transcript identifiers, and then more broadly by searching for encoded protein domains by keyword. The latter is a novel and experimental feature, and grants users the ability to curate gene families from any dataset hosted on CrustyBase in a matter of minutes. We present case studies to demonstrate the utility of these features.ConclusionCommunity engagement with this resource has been very positive, and we hope that improvements to the service will further enable the research of users of the platform. Web-based platforms such as CrustyBase have many potential applications across life science domains, including the health sector, which are yet to be realised. This leads to a wider discussion around the role of web-based resources in facilitating an open and collaborative research community.
Genetic profiling of the biodiversity in cultivated crop plants is necessary to preserve important genes and utilize them in a breeding program. Cucumber is used as a model plant to study various characteristics of Cucurbitaceae. Its adaptation to a wide range of climatic conditions suggested analyzing the landraces. The present study was conducted to evaluate the differences, at the genetic level, among landraces spanning five continents. DNA extracted from fifty-six landraces selected from USDA germplasm bank to cover a global representative sample of world cucumber landraces was used for polymerase chain reaction using twenty-eight polymorphic expressed sequence tags simple sequence repeat (EST-SSR) markers. Twenty-eight EST-SSR markers covering all seven chromosomes yielded 98 bands with an average of 3.42 bands per marker. Polymorphic information content ranged from 0.00 (EC35) to 0.74 (EC17) with an average of 0.34. Six clusters provided an appropriate summary of the variation among the landraces, with the two largest groups including 32 (Asiatic) and 17 (European and American) landraces, respectively. Four small groups, three with two members, and one with one member (PI 525155-Egypt) were dissimilar to the two main groups. Landraces from the same region were often clustered together. Genetic similarity of the landraces was revealed by marker banding patterns. The locations of genetic diversity for cucumber landraces can be identified from this study.
Background The core regulation of the abscisic acid (ABA) signalling pathway comprises the multigenic families PYL, PP2C, and SnRK2. In this work, we conducted a genome-wide study of the components of these families in Cucurbita pepo. Results The bioinformatic analysis of the C. pepo genome resulted in the identification of 19 CpPYL, 102 CpPP2C and 10 CpSnRK2 genes. The investigation of gene structure and protein motifs allowed to define 4 PYL, 13 PP2C and 3 SnRK2 subfamilies. RNA-seq analysis was used to determine the expression of these gene families in different plant organs, as well as to detect their differential gene expression during germination, and in response to ABA and cold stress in leaves. The specific tissue expression of some gene members indicated the relevant role of some ABA signalling genes in plant development. Moreover, their differential expression under ABA treatment or cold stress revealed those ABA signalling genes that responded to ABA, and those that were up- or down-regulated in response to cold stress. A reduced number of genes responded to both treatments. Specific PYL-PP2C-SnRK2 genes that had potential roles in germination were also detected, including those regulated early during the imbibition phase, those regulated later during the embryo extension and radicle emergence phase, and those induced or repressed during the whole germination process. Conclusions The outcomes of this research open new research lines for agriculture and for assessing gene function in future studies.
Background The Argentine stem weevil (ASW, Listronotus bonariensis) is a significant pasture pest in Aotearoa New Zealand, primarily controlled by the parasitoid biocontrol agent Microctonus hyperodae. Despite providing effective control of ASW soon after release, M. hyperodae parasitism rates have since declined significantly, with ASW hypothesised to have evolved resistance to its biocontrol agent. While the parasitism arsenal of M. hyperodae has previously been investigated, revealing many venom components and an exogenous novel DNA virus Microctonus hyperodae filamentous virus (MhFV), the effects of said arsenal on gene expression in ASW during parasitism have not been examined. In this study, we performed a multi-species transcriptomic analysis to investigate the biology of ASW parasitism by M. hyperodae, as well as the decline in efficacy of this biocontrol system.Results The transcriptomic response of ASW to parasitism by M. hyperodae involves modulation of the weevil's innate immune system, flight muscle components, and lipid and glucose metabolism. The multispecies approach also revealed continued expression of venom components in parasitised ASW, as well as the transmission of MhFV to weevils during parasitism and some interrupted parasitism attempts. Transcriptomics did not detect a clear indication of parasitoid avoidance or other mechanisms to explain biocontrol decline.Conclusions This study has expanded our understanding of interactions between M. hyperodae and ASW in a biocontrol system of critical importance to Aotearoa-New Zealand's agricultural economy. Transmission of MhFV to ASW during successful and interrupted parasitism attempts may link to a premature mortality phenomenon in ASW, hypothesised to be a result of a toxin-antitoxin system. Further research into MhFV and its potential role in ASW premature mortality is required to explore whether manipulation of this viral infection has the potential to increase biocontrol efficacy in future.
Background The dramatic increase of antimicrobial resistance in the healthcare realm has become inexorably linked to the abuse of antibiotics over the years. Therefore, this study seeks to identify potential postbiotic metabolites derived from lactic acid bacteria such as Lactiplantibacillus plantarum that could exhibit antimicrobial properties against multi-drug resistant pathogens. Results In the present work, the genome sequence of Lactiplantibacillus plantarum PA21 consisting of three contigs was assembled to a size of 3,218,706 bp. Phylogenomic analysis and average nucleotide identity (ANI) revealed L. plantarum PA21 is closely related to genomes isolated from diverse niches such as dairy products, food, and animals. Genome mining through the BAGEL4 and antiSMASH database revealed four bacteriocins in a single cluster and four regions of biosynthetic gene clusters responsible for the production of bioactive compounds. The potential probiotic genes indirectly responsible for postbiotic metabolites production were also identified. Additionally, in vitro studies showed that the L. plantarum PA21 cell-free supernatant exhibited antimicrobial activity against all nine methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and three out of 13 Klebsiella pneumoniae clinical isolates tested. Conclusion Results in this study demonstrates that L. plantarum PA21 postbiotic metabolites is a prolific source of antimicrobials against multi-drug resistant pathogens with potential antimicrobial properties.
Gibel carp (Carassius gibelio) is a cyprinid fish that originated in eastern Eurasia and is considered as invasive in European freshwater ecosystems. The populations of gibel carp in Europe are mostly composed of asexually reproducing triploid females (i.e., reproducing by gynogenesis) and sexually reproducing diploid females and males. Although some cases of coexisting sexual and asexual reproductive forms are known in vertebrates, the molecular mechanisms maintaining such coexistence are still in question. Both reproduction modes are supposed to exhibit evolutionary and ecological advantages and disadvantages. To better understand the coexistence of these two reproduction strategies, we performed transcriptome profile analysis of gonad tissues (ovaries) and studied the differentially expressed reproduction-associated genes in sexual and asexual females. We used high-throughput RNA sequencing to generate transcriptomic profiles of gonadal tissues of triploid asexual females and males, diploid sexual males and females of gibel carp, as well as diploid individuals from two closely-related species, C. auratus and Cyprinus carpio. Using SNP clustering, we showed the close similarity of C. gibelio and C. auratus with a basal position of C. carpio to both Carassius species. Using transcriptome profile analyses, we showed that many genes and pathways are involved in both gynogenetic and sexual reproduction in C. gibelio; however, we also found that 1500 genes, including 100 genes involved in cell cycle control, meiosis, oogenesis, embryogenesis, fertilization, steroid hormone signaling, and biosynthesis were differently expressed in the ovaries of asexual and sexual females. We suggest that the overall downregulation of reproduction-associated pathways in asexual females, and their maintenance in sexual ones, allows the populations of C. gibelio to combine the evolutionary and ecological advantages of the two reproductive strategies. However, we showed that many sexual-reproduction-related genes are maintained and expressed in asexual females, suggesting that gynogenetic gibel carp retains the genetic toolkits for meiosis and sexual reproduction. These findings shed new light on the evolution of this asexual and sexual complex.
Chrozophora sabulosa Kar. & Kir. is a biennial herbaceous plant that belongs to the Euphorbiaceae family and has medicinal properties. This research aimed to identify the genetic characteristics and phylogenetic position of the Chrozophora genus within the Euphorbiaceae family. The evolutionary position of the Chrozophora genus was previously unknown due to insufficient research. Therefore, to determine the evolutionary link between C. sabulosa and other related species, we conducted a study using the NGS Illumina platform to sequence the C. sabulosa chloroplast (cp.) genome. The study results showed that the genome was 156,488 bp in length. It had a quadripartite structure consisting of two inverted repeats (IRb and IRa) of 24,649-bp, separated by an 87,696-bp LSC region and a 19,494-bp SSC region. The CP genome contained 113 unique genes, including four rRNA genes, 30 tRNA genes, and 79 CDS genes. In the second copy of the inverted repeat, there were 18 duplicated genes. The C. sabulosa lacks the petD, petB, rpl2, and rps16 intron. The analysis of simple sequence repeats (SSRs) revealed 93 SSR loci of 22 types and 78 oligonucleotide repeats of four kinds. The phylogenetic investigation showed that the Chrozophora genus evolved paraphyletically from other members of the Euphorbiaceae family. To support the phylogenetic findings, we selected species from the Euphorbiaceae and Phyllanthaceae families to compare with C. sabulosa for Ks and Ka substitution rates, InDels investigation, IR contraction and expansion, and SNPs analysis. The results of these comparative studies align with the phylogenetic findings. We identified six highly polymorphic regions shared by both families, which could be used as molecular identifiers for the Chrozophora genus (rpl33-rps18, rps18-rpl20, rps15-ycf1, ndhG-ndhI, psaI-ycf4, petA-psbJ). The cp. genome sequence of C. sabulosa reveals the evolution of plastid sequences in Chrozophora species. This is the first time the cp. genome of a Chrozophora genus has been sequenced, serving as a foundation for future sequencing of other species within the Chrozophoreae tribe and facilitating in-depth taxonomic research. The results of this research will also aid in identifying new Chrozophora species.
Medicinal plants are rich sources for treating various diseases due their bioactive secondary metabolites. Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) is one of the medicinal plants traditionally used in human nutrition and medicine which contains an active substance, called diosgenin, with anticancer properties. Biosynthesis of this important anticancer compound in fenugreek can be enhanced using eliciting agents which involves in manipulation of metabolite and biochemical pathways stimulating defense responses. Methyl jasmonate elicitor was used to increase diosgenin biosynthesis in fenugreek plants. However, the molecular mechanism and gene expression profiles underlying diosgening accumulation remain unexplored. In the current study we performed an extensive analysis of publicly available RNA-sequencing datasets to elucidate the biosynthesis and expression profile of fenugreek plants treated with methyl jasmonate. For this purpose, seven read datasets of methyl jasmonate treated plants were obtained that were covering several post-treatment time points (6-120 h). Transcriptomics analysis revealed upregulation of several key genes involved in diosgenein biosynthetic pathway including Squalene synthase (SQS) as the first committed step in diosgenin biosynthesis as well as Squalene Epoxidase (SEP) and Cycloartenol Synthase (CAS) upon methyl jasmonate application. Bioinformatics analysis, including gene ontology enrichment and pathway analysis, further supported the involvement of these genes in diosgenin biosynthesis. The bioinformatics analysis led to a comprehensive validation, with expression profiling across three different fenugreek populations treated with the same methyl jasmonate application. Initially, key genes like SQS, SEP, and CAS showed upregulation, followed by later upregulation of Delta 24, suggesting dynamic pathway regulation. Real-time PCR confirmed consistent upregulation of SQS and SEP, peaking at 72 h. Additionally, candidate genes Delta 24 and SMT1 highlighted roles in directing metabolic flux towards diosgenin biosynthesis. This integrated approach validates the bioinformatics findings and elucidates fenugreek's molecular response to methyl jasmonate elicitation, offering insights for enhancing diosgenin yield. The assembled transcripts and gene expression profiles are deposited in the Zenodo open repository at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8155183.
BackgroundFervidobacterium is a genus of thermophilic anaerobic Gram-negative rod-shaped bacteria belonging to the phylum Thermotogota. They can grow through fermentation on a wide range of sugars and protein-rich substrates. Some can also break down feather keratin, which has significant biotechnological potential. Fervidobacteria genomes have undergone several horizontal gene transfer events, sharing DNA with unrelated microbial taxa. Despite increasing biotechnological and evolutionary interest in this genus, only seven species have been described to date. Here, we present and describe six new and complete Fervidobacterium genomes, including the type strains Fervidobacterium gondwanense CBS-1 T, F. islandicum H-21 T and F. thailandense FC2004T, one novel isolate from Georgia (strain GSH) and two strains (DSM 21710 and DSM 13770) that have not been previously described along with an evolutionary and phylogenomic analysis of the genus.ResultsThe complete genomes were around 2 Mb with approximately 2,000 CDS identified and annotated in each of them and a G + C content ranging from 38.9 mol% to 45.8 mol%. Phylogenomic comparisons of all currently available Fervidobacterium genomes, including OrthoANI and TYGS analyses, as well as a phylogenetic analysis based on the 16S rRNA gene, identified six species and nine subspecies clusters across the genus, with a consistent topology and a distant and separately branching species, Fervidobacterium thailandense. F. thailandense harbored the highest number of transposases, CRISPR clusters, pseudo genes and horizontally transferred regions The pan genome of the genus showed that 44% of the genes belong to the cloud pangenome, with most of the singletons found also in F. thailandense.ConclusionsThe additional genome sequences described in this work and the comparison with all available Fervidobacterium genome sequences provided new insights into the evolutionary history of this genus and supported a phylogenetic reclassification. The phylogenomic results from OrthoANI and TYGS analyses revealed that F. riparium and F. gondwanense belong to the same genome species, and includes Fervidobacterium sp. 13770, while "F. pennivorans" strain DYC belongs to a separate genome species, whereas Fervidobacterium sp. 21710 and Fervidobacterium sp. GSH within the Fervidobacterium pennivorans clade represent two subspecies. F. changbaicum is reclassified as F. islandicum.
Reducing the levels of dietary protein is an effective nutritional approach in lowering feed cost and nitrogen emissions in ruminants. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of dietary Lys/Met ratio in a low protein diet (10%, dry matter basis) on the growth performance and hepatic function (antioxidant capacity, immune status, and glycolytic activity) in Tibetan lambs. Ninety two-month-old rams with an average weight of 15.37 +/- 0.92 kg were randomly assigned to LP-L (dietary Lys/Met = 1:1), LP-M (dietary Lys/Met = 2:1) and LP-H (dietary Lys/Met = 3:1) treatments. The trial was conducted over 100 d, including 10 d of adaption to the diets. Hepatic phenotypes, antioxidant capacity, immune status, glycolytic activity and gene expression profiling was detected after the conclusion of the feeding trials. The results showed that the body weight was higher in the LP-L group when compared to those on the LP-M group (P < 0.05). In addition, the activities of the catalase (CAT) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) in the LP-L group were significantly increased compared with the LP-M group (P < 0.05), while the malondialdehyde (MDA) levels in LP-H group were significantly decreased (P < 0.05). Compared with LP-H group, both hepatic glycogen (P < 0.01) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (P < 0.05) were significantly elevated in LP-L group. For the LP-L group, the hepatocytes were arranged radially with the central vein in the center, and hepatic plates exhibited tight arrangement. Transcriptome analysis identified 29, 179, and 129 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the LP-M vs. LP-L, LP-H vs. LP-M, and LP-H vs. LP-L groups, respectively (Q-values < 0.05 and |log2Fold Change| > 1). Gene Ontology (GO) and correlation analyses showed that in the LP-L group, core genes (C1QA and JUNB) enriched in oxidoreductase activity were positively correlated with antioxidant indicators, while the MYO9A core gene enriched in the immune response was positively associated with immune indicators, and core genes enriched in molecular function (PDK3 and PDP2) were positively correlated with glycolysis indicators. In summary, low-protein diet with a low Lys/Met ratio (1:1) could reduce the hepatic oxidative stress and improve the glycolytic activity by regulating the expression of related genes of Tibetan sheep.
Background Orychophragmus violaceus is a potentially important industrial oilseed crop due to the two 24-carbon dihydroxy fatty acids (diOH-FA) that was newly identified from its seed oil via a 'discontinuous elongation' process. Although many research efforts have focused on the diOH-FA biosynthesis mechanism and identified the potential co-expressed diacylglycerol acyltranferase (DGAT) gene associated with triacylglycerol (TAG)-polyestolides biosynthesis, the dynamics of metabolic changes during seed development of O. violaceus as well as its associated regulatory network changes are poorly understood.Results In this study, by combining metabolome and transcriptome analysis, we identified that 1,003 metabolites and 22,479 genes were active across four stages of seed development, which were further divided into three main clusters based on the patterns of metabolite accumulation and/or gene expression. Among which, cluster2 was mostly related to diOH-FA biosynthesis pathway. We thus further constructed transcription factor (TF)-structural genes regulatory map for the genes associated with the flavonoids, fatty acids and diOH-FA biosynthesis pathway in this cluster. In particular, several TF families such as bHLH, B3, HD-ZIP, MYB were found to potentially regulate the metabolism associated with the diOH-FA pathway. Among which, multiple candidate TFs with promising potential for increasing the diOH-FA content were identified, and we further traced the evolutionary history of these key genes among species of Brassicaceae.Conclusion Taken together, our study provides new insight into the gene resources and potential relevant regulatory mechanisms of diOH-FA biosynthesis uniquely in seeds of O. violaceus, which will help to promote the downstream breeding efforts of this potential oilseed crop and advance the bio-lubricant industry.
Background5-Methylcytosine (5mC) plays a very important role in gene stability, transcription, and development. Therefore, accurate identification of the 5mC site is of key importance in genetic and pathological studies. However, traditional experimental methods for identifying 5mC sites are time-consuming and costly, so there is an urgent need to develop computational methods to automatically detect and identify these 5mC sites.ResultsDeep learning methods have shown great potential in the field of 5mC sites, so we developed a deep learning combinatorial model called i5mC-DCGA. The model innovatively uses the Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM) to improve the Dense Convolutional Network (DenseNet), which is improved to extract advanced local feature information. Subsequently, we combined a Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit (BiGRU) and a Self-Attention mechanism to extract global feature information. Our model can learn feature representations of abstract and complex from simple sequence coding, while having the ability to solve the sample imbalance problem in benchmark datasets. The experimental results show that the i5mC-DCGA model achieves 97.02%, 96.52%, 96.58% and 85.58% in sensitivity (Sn), specificity (Sp), accuracy (Acc) and matthews correlation coefficient (MCC), respectively.ConclusionsThe i5mC-DCGA model outperforms other existing prediction tools in predicting 5mC sites, and it is currently the most representative promoter 5mC site prediction tool. The benchmark dataset and source code for the i5mC-DCGA model can be found in https://github.com/leirufeng/i5mC-DCGA.
KNOXs, a type of homeobox genes that encode atypical homeobox proteins, play an essential role in the regulation of growth and development, hormonal response, and abiotic stress in plants. However, the KNOX gene family has not been explored in sweet potato. In this study, through sequence alignment, genomic structure analysis, and phylogenetic characterization, 17, 12 and 11 KNOXs in sweet potato (I. batatas, 2n = 6x = 90) and its two diploid relatives I. trifida (2n = 2x = 30) and I. triloba (2n = 2x = 30) were identified. The protein physicochemical properties, chromosome localization, phylogenetic relationships, gene structure, protein interaction network, cis-elements of promoters, tissue-specific expression and expression patterns under hormone treatment and abiotic stresses of these 40 KNOX genes were systematically studied. IbKNOX4, -5, and - 6 were highly expressed in the leaves of the high-yield varieties Longshu9 and Xushu18. IbKNOX3 and IbKNOX8 in Class I were upregulated in initial storage roots compared to fibrous roots. IbKNOXs in Class M were specifically expressed in the stem tip and hardly expressed in other tissues. Moreover, IbKNOX2 and - 6, and their homologous genes were induced by PEG/mannitol and NaCl treatments. The results showed that KNOXs were involved in regulating growth and development, hormone crosstalk and abiotic stress responses between sweet potato and its two diploid relatives. This study provides a comparison of these KNOX genes in sweet potato and its two diploid relatives and a theoretical basis for functional studies.
BackgroundLipid metabolism plays a pivotal role in asthma pathogenesis. However, a comprehensive analysis of the importance of lipid metabolism-related genes (LMRGs) in regulating the immune microenvironment in asthma remains lacking. The transcriptome matrix was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset. Differentially expressed analysis and weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) were conducted on the GSE74986 dataset to select hub LMRGs, and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was conducted to explore their biological functions. The CIBERSORT algorithm was used to determine immune infiltration in the asthma and control groups, and the correlation of diagnostic biomarkers and immune cells was performed via Spearman correlation analysis. Subsequently, a competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network was constructed to investigate the hidden molecular mechanism of asthma. The expression levels of the hub genes were further validated in the GSE143192 dataset, and RT-qPCR and immunofluorescence were performed to verify the reliability of the results in the OVA asthma model. Lastly, the ceRNA network was confirmed by qRT-PCR and RNAi experiments in the characteristic cytokine (IL-13)-induced asthma cellular model.ResultsASAH1, ACER3 and SGPP1 were identified as hub LMRGs and were mainly involved in protein secretion, mTORC1 signaling, and fatty acid metabolism. We found more infiltration of CD8+ T cells, activated NK cells, and monocytes and less M0 macrophage infiltration in the asthma group than in the healthy control group. In addition, ASAH1, ACER3, and SGPP1 were negatively correlated with CD8+ T cells and activated NK cells, but positively correlated with M0 macrophages. Within the ceRNA network, SNHG9-hsa-miR-615-3p-ACER3, hsa-miR-212-5p and hsa-miR-5682 may play crucial roles in asthma pathogenesis. The low expression of ASAH1 and SGPP1 in asthma was also validated in the GSE74075 dataset. After SNHG9 knockdown, miR-615-3p expression was significantly upregulated, while that of ACER3 was significantly downregulated.ConclusionASAH1, ACER3 and SGPP1 might be diagnostic biomarkers for asthma, and are associated with increased immune system activation. In addition, SNHG9-hsa-miR-615-3p-ACER3 may be viewed as effective therapeutic targets for asthma. Our findings might provide a novel perspective for future research on asthma.
Background Wohlfahrtia magnifica is an obligatory parasite that causes myiasis in several warm-blooded vertebrates. Adult females deposit the first-stage larvae directly onto wounds or natural body orifices (e.g., genitalia) of the host, from where they quickly colonize the host tissue and feed on it for development. The infestation of W. magnifica can lead to health issues, welfare concerns, and substantial economic losses. To date, little is known about the molecular mechanisms of the W. magnifica-causing myiasis. Results In this study, we collected parasitic-stage larvae of W. magnifica from wounds of naturally infested Bactrian camels, as well as pupae and adult flies reared in vitro from the wound-collected larvae, for investigating the gene expression profiles of the different developmental stages of W. magnifica, with a particular focus on examining gene families closely related to the parasitism of the wound-collected larvae. As key proteins related to the parasite-host interaction, 2049 excretory/secretory (ES) proteins were identified in W. magnifica through the integration of multiple bioinformatics approaches. Functional analysis indicates that these ES proteins are primarily involved in cuticle development, peptidase activity, immune response, and metabolic processes. The global investigation of gene expression at different developmental stages using pairwise comparisons and weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) showed that the upregulated genes during second-stage larvae were related to cuticle development, peptidase activity, and RNA transcription and translation; during third-stage larvae to peptidase inhibitor activity and nutrient reservoir activity; during pupae to cell and tissue morphogenesis and cell and tissue development; and during adult flies to signal perception, many of them involved in light perception, and adult behavior, e.g., feeding, mating, and locomotion. Specifically, the expression level analysis of the likely parasitism-related genes in parasitic wound-collected larvae revealed a significant upregulation of 88 peptidase genes (including 47 serine peptidase genes), 110 cuticle protein genes, and 21 heat shock protein (hsp) genes. Interestingly, the expression of 2 antimicrobial peptide (AMP) genes, including 1 defensin and 1 diptericin, was also upregulated in the parasitic larvae. Conclusions We identified ES proteins in W. magnifica and investigated their functional distribution. In addition, gene expression profiles at different developmental stages of W. magnifica were examined. Specifically, we focused on gene families closely related to parasitism of wound-collected larvae. These findings shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying the life cycle of the myiasis-causing fly, especially during the parasitic larval stages, and provide guidance for the development of control measures against W. magnifica.
Background Current RNA-seq analysis software for RNA-seq data tends to use similar parameters across different species without considering species-specific differences. However, the suitability and accuracy of these tools may vary when analyzing data from different species, such as humans, animals, plants, fungi, and bacteria. For most laboratory researchers lacking a background in information science, determining how to construct an analysis workflow that meets their specific needs from the array of complex analytical tools available poses a significant challenge.Results By utilizing RNA-seq data from plants, animals, and fungi, it was observed that different analytical tools demonstrate some variations in performance when applied to different species. A comprehensive experiment was conducted specifically for analyzing plant pathogenic fungal data, focusing on differential gene analysis as the ultimate goal. In this study, 288 pipelines using different tools were applied to analyze five fungal RNA-seq datasets, and the performance of their results was evaluated based on simulation. This led to the establishment of a relatively universal and superior fungal RNA-seq analysis pipeline that can serve as a reference, and certain standards for selecting analysis tools were derived for reference. Additionally, we compared various tools for alternative splicing analysis. The results based on simulated data indicated that rMATS remained the optimal choice, although consideration could be given to supplementing with tools such as SpliceWiz.Conclusion The experimental results demonstrate that, in comparison to the default software parameter configurations, the analysis combination results after tuning can provide more accurate biological insights. It is beneficial to carefully select suitable analysis software based on the data, rather than indiscriminately choosing tools, in order to achieve high-quality analysis results more efficiently.
Background The yak (Bos grunniens) is a large ruminant species that lives in high-altitude regions and exhibits excellent adaptation to the plateau environments. To further understand the genetic characteristics and adaptive mechanisms of yak, we have developed a multi-omics database of yak including genome, transcriptome, proteome, and DNA methylation data.Description The Yak Genome Database (http://yakgenomics.com/) integrates the research results of genome, transcriptome, proteome, and DNA methylation, and provides an integrated platform for researchers to share and exchange omics data. The database contains 26,518 genes, 62 transcriptomes, 144,309 proteome spectra, and 22,478 methylation sites of yak. The genome module provides access to yak genome sequences, gene annotations and variant information. The transcriptome module offers transcriptome data from various tissues of yak and cattle strains at different developmental stages. The proteome module presents protein profiles from diverse yak organs. Additionally, the DNA methylation module shows the DNA methylation information at each base of the whole genome. Functions of data downloading and browsing, functional gene exploration, and experimental practice were available for the database.Conclusion This comprehensive database provides a valuable resource for further investigations on development, molecular mechanisms underlying high-altitude adaptation, and molecular breeding of yak.
Background Terpenes are important components of plant aromas, and terpene synthases (TPSs) are the key enzymes driving terpene diversification. In this study, we characterized the volatile terpenes in five different Chrysanthemum nankingense tissues. In addition, genome-wide identification and expression analysis of TPS genes was conducted utilizing an improved chromosome-scale genome assembly and tissue-specific transcriptomes. The biochemical functions of three representative TPSs were also investigated. Results We identified tissue-specific volatile organic compound (VOC) and volatile terpene profiles. The improved Chrysanthemum nankingense genome assembly was high-quality, including a larger assembled size (3.26 Gb) and a better contig N50 length (3.18 Mb) compared to the old version. A total of 140 CnTPS genes were identified, with the majority representing the TPS-a and TPS-b subfamilies. The chromosomal distribution of these TPS genes was uneven, and 26 genes were included in biosynthetic gene clusters. Closely-related Chrysanthemum taxa were also found to contain diverse TPS genes, and the expression profiles of most CnTPSs were tissue-specific. The three investigated CnTPS enzymes exhibited versatile activities, suggesting multifunctionality. Conclusions We systematically characterized the structure and diversity of TPS genes across the Chrysanthemum nankingense genome, as well as the potential biochemical functions of representative genes. Our results provide a basis for future studies of terpene biosynthesis in chrysanthemums, as well as for the breeding of improved chrysanthemum varieties.
BackgroundArundinelleae is a small tribe within the Poaceae (grass family) possessing a widespread distribution that includes Asia, the Americas, and Africa. Several species of Arundinelleae are used as natural forage, feed, and raw materials for paper. The tribe is taxonomically cumbersome due to a paucity of clear diagnostic morphological characters. There has been scant genetic and genomic research conducted for this group, and as a result the phylogenetic relationships and species boundaries within Arundinelleae are poorly understood.ResultsWe compared and analyzed 11 plastomes of Arundinelleae, of which seven plastomes were newly sequenced. The plastomes range from 139,629 base pairs (bp) (Garnotia tenella) to 140,943 bp (Arundinella barbinodis), with a standard four-part structure. The average GC content was 38.39%, but varied in different regions of the plastome. In all, 110 genes were annotated, comprising 76 protein-coding genes, 30 tRNA genes, and four rRNA genes. Furthermore, 539 simple sequence repeats, 519 long repeats, and 10 hyper-variable regions were identified from the 11 plastomes of Arundinelleae. A phylogenetic reconstruction of Panicoideae based on 98 plastomes demonstrated the monophyly of Arundinella and Garnotia, but the circumscription of Arundinelleae remains unresolved.ConclusionComplete chloroplast genome sequences can improve phylogenetic resolution relative to single marker approaches, particularly within taxonomically challenging groups. All phylogenetic analyses strongly support the monophyly of Arundinella and Garnotia, respectively, but the monophylly of Arundinelleae was not well supported. The intergeneric phylogenetic relationships within Arundinelleae require clarification, indicating that more data is necessary to resolve generic boundaries and evaluate the monophyly of Arundinelleae. A comprehensive taxonomic revision for the tribe is necessary. In addition, the identified hyper-variable regions could function as molecular markers for clarifying phylogenetic relationships and potentially as barcoding markers for species identification in the future.
Pseudorabies have caused enormous economic losses in China's pig industry and have recurred on many large pig farms since late 2011. The disease is caused by highly pathogenic, antigenic variant pseudorabies virus (vPRV) strains. Our laboratory isolated a pseudorabies virus in 2015 and named it XJ5. The pathogenic ability of this mutant strain was much stronger than that of the original isolate. After we sequenced its whole genome (GenBank accession number: OP512542), we found that its overall structure was not greatly changed compared with that of the previous strain Ea (KX423960.1). The whole genome alignment showed that XJ5 had a strong genetic relationship with the strains isolated in China after 2012 reported in GenBank. Based on the isolation time of XJ5 and the mutation and recombination analysis of programs, we found that the whole genome homology of XJ5 and other strains with Chinese isolates was greater than 95%, while the homology with strains outside Asia was less than 94%, which indicated that there may be some recombination and mutation patterns. We found that virulent PRV isolates emerged successively in China in 2011 and formed two different evolutionary clades from foreign isolates. At the same time, this may be due to improper immunization and the presence of wild strains in the field, and recent reports have confirmed that Bartha vaccine strains recombine with wild strains to obtain new pathogenic strains. We performed genetic evolution analysis of XJ5 isolated and sequenced in our laboratory to trace its possible mutations and recombination. We found that XJ5 may be the result of natural mutation of a virus in a branch of mutant strains widely existing in China.
The cuttlefish, Sepia pharaonis, is characterized by rapid growth and strong disease resistance, making it an important commercially farmed cephalopod species in the southeastern coastal regions of China. However, in the reproductive process of S. pharaonis, there are challenges such as a low output of eggs, poor quality, and low survival rates of newly hatched juveniles. Therefore, there is an urgent need to study the molecular mechanisms underlying ovarian development in this species. In this study, we conducted the first transcriptomic analysis of the ovary at four developmental stages: the undeveloped stage, developing stage, nearly-ripe stage, and ripe stage, and compared the transcriptomics among these four stages using Illumina sequencing technology. The total numbers of clean reads of the four stages ranged from 40,890,772 to 52,055,714 reads. A total of 136,829 DEGs were obtained, GC base ratios of raw data were between 38.44 and 44.59%, and the number of uniquely mapped reads spanned from 88.08 to 95.90%. The Pearson correlation coefficient demonstrated a strong correlation among different samples within the same group, PCA and Anosim analysis also revealed that the grouping of these four stages was feasible, and each stage could be distinguished from the others. GO enrichment analysis demonstrated that ovarian follicle growth, sex differentiation, and transforming growth factor beta receptor, played a foreshadowing role at the early ovarian development stage, and the terms of small molecule metabolic process, peptide metabolic process, and catalytic activity were prominent at the mature stage. Meanwhile, KEGG analysis showed that the early ovarian development of S. pharaonis was mainly associated with the cell cycle, DNA replication, and carbon metabolism, while the mid-late ovarian development was involved with the signal transduction, endocrine system, and reproduction pathway. RT-qPCR further confirmed the consistent expression patterns of genes such as 17 beta-HSD, GH, VGS, NFR, and NYR in the ovaries of S. pharaonis, exhibiting elevated levels of expression during the maturation stage. Conversely, ER and OM exhibited high expression levels during the early stages of ovarian development. These transcriptomic data provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of S. pharaonis ovarian development. The findings of this study will contribute to improving the reproduction and development of cuttlefish and enriching the bioinformatics knowledge of cephalopods.
Background Pseudomonas juntendi is a newly identified opportunistic pathogen, of which we have limited understanding. P. juntendi strains are often multidrug resistant, which complicates clinical management of infection. Methods A strain of Pseudomonas juntendi (strain L4326) isolated from feces was characterized by MALDI-TOF-MS and Average Nucleotide Identity BLAST. This strain was further subject to whole-genome sequencing and Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic analysis. The strain was phenotypically characterized by antimicrobial susceptibility testing and conjugation assays. Results We have isolated the novel P. juntendi strain L4236, which was multidrug resistant, but retained sensitivity to amikacin. L4236 harbored a megaplasmid that encoded bla(OXA-1) and a novel bla(IMP-1) resistance gene variant. P. juntendi strain L4236 was phylogenetically related to P. juntendi strain SAMN30525517. Conclusion A rare P. juntendi strain was isolated from human feces in southern China with a megaplasmid coharboring bla(IMP-1-like) and bla(OXA-1). Antimicrobial selection pressures may have driven acquisition of drug-resistance gene mutations and carriage of the megaplasmid.
Background Alternative polyadenylation (APA), alternative splicing (AS), and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play regulatory roles in post-transcriptional processes in plants. However, little is known about their involvement in xylem development in Dalbergia odorifera, a valuable rosewood species with medicinal and commercial significance. We addressed this by conducting Isoform Sequencing (Iso-Seq) using PacBio's SMRT technology and combined it with RNA-seq analysis (RNA sequencing on Illumina platform) after collecting xylem samples from the transition zone and the sapwood of D. odorifera. Results We identified 14,938 full-length transcripts, including 9,830 novel isoforms, which has updated the D. odorifera genome annotation. Our analysis has revealed that 4,164 genes undergo APA, whereas 3,084 genes encounter AS. We have also annotated 118 lncRNAs. Furthermore, RNA-seq analysis identified 170 differential alternative splicing (DAS) events, 344 genes with differential APA site usage (DE-APA), and 6 differentially expressed lncRNAs in the transition zone when compared to the sapwood. AS, APA, and lncRNAs are differentially regulated during xylem development. Differentially expressed APA genes were enriched for terpenoid and flavonoid metabolism, indicating their role in the heartwood formation. Additionally, DE-APA genes were associated with cell wall biosynthesis and terpenoid metabolism, implying an APA's role in wood formation. A DAS gene (involved in chalcone accumulation) with a significantly greater inclusion of the last exon in the transition zone than in the sapwood was identified. We also found that differentially expressed lncRNAs targeted the genes related to terpene synthesis. Conclusions This study enhances our understanding of the molecular regulatory mechanisms underlying wood formation in D. odorifera, and provides valuable genetic resources and insights for its molecular-assisted breeding.
BackgroundEncystment is an important survival strategy extensively employed by microbial organisms to survive unfavorable conditions. Single-celled ciliated protists (ciliates) are popular model eukaryotes for studying encystment, whereby these cells degenerate their ciliary structures and develop cyst walls, then reverse the process under more favorable conditions. However, to date, the evolutionary basis and mechanism for encystment in ciliates is largely unknown. With the rapid development of high-throughput sequencing technologies, genome sequencing and comparative genomics of ciliates have become effective methods to provide insights into above questions.ResultsHere, we profiled the MAC genome of Pseudourostyla cristata, a model hypotrich ciliate for encystment studies. Like other hypotrich MAC genomes, the P. cristata MAC genome is extremely fragmented with a single gene on most chromosomes, and encodes introns that are generally small and lack a conserved branch point for pre-mRNA splicing. Gene family expansion analyses indicate that multiple gene families involved in the encystment are expanded during the evolution of P. cristata. Furthermore, genomic comparisons with other five representative hypotrichs indicate that gene families of phosphorelay sensor kinase, which play a role in the two-component signal transduction system that is related to encystment, show significant expansion among all six hypotrichs. Additionally, cyst wall-related chitin synthase genes have experienced structural changes that increase them from single-exon to multi-exon genes during evolution. These genomic features potentially promote the encystment in hypotrichs and enhance their ability to survive in adverse environments during evolution.ConclusionsWe systematically investigated the genomic structure of hypotrichs and key evolutionary phenomenon, gene family expansion, for encystment promotion in ciliates. In summary, our results provided insights into the evolutionary mechanism of encystment in ciliates.
Background Sweetpotato is a typical ''potassium (K+) favoring'' food crop, which root differentiation process needs a large supply of potassium fertilizer and determine the final root yield. To further understand the regulatory network of the response to low potassium stress, here we analyze physiological and biochemical characteristics, and investigated root transcriptional changes in two sweetpotato genotypes, namely, - K tolerant "Xu32" and - K susceptible"NZ1".Result We found Xu32 had the higher capability of K+ absorption than NZ1 with better growth performance, higher net photosynthetic rate and higher chlorophyll contents under low potassium stress, and identified 889 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in Xu32, 634 DEGs in NZ1, 256 common DEGs in both Xu32 and NZ1. The Gene Ontology (GO) term in molecular function enrichment analysis revealed that the DEGs under low K+ stress are predominately involved in catalytic activity, binding, transporter activity and antioxidant activity. Moreover, the more numbers of identified DEGs in Xu32 than that in NZ1 responded to K+-deficiency belong to the process of photosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, ion transport, hormone signaling, stress-related and antioxidant system may result in different ability to K+-deficiency tolerance. The unique genes in Xu32 may make a great contribution to enhance low K+ tolerance, and provide useful information for the molecular regulation mechanism of K+-deficiency tolerance in sweetpotato.Conclusions The common and distinct expression pattern between the two sweetpotato genotypes illuminate a complex mechanism response to low potassium exist in sweetpotato. The study provides some candidate genes, which can be used in sweetpotato breeding program for improving low potassium stress tolerance.
Macrobrachium nipponense is an important commercial freshwater species in China. However, the ability of alkali tolerance of M. nipponense is insufficient to culture in the major saline-alkali water source in China. Thus, it is urgently needed to perform the genetic improvement of alkali tolerance in this species. In the present study, we aimed to analyse the effects of alkali treatment on gills in this species after 96 h alkalinity exposure under the alkali concentrations of 0 mmol/L, 4 mmol/L, 8 mmol/L, and 12 mmol/L through performing the histological observations, measurement of antioxidant enzymes, metabolic profiling analysis, and transcriptome profiling analysis. The results of the present study revealed that alkali treatment stimulated the contents of malondialdehyde, glutathione, glutathione peroxidase in gills, indicating these antioxidant enzymes plays essential roles in the protection of body from the damage, caused by the alkali treatment. In addition, high concentration of alkali treatment (> 8 mmol/L) resulted in the damage of gill membrane and haemolymph vessel, affecting the normal respiratory function of gill. Metabolic profiling analysis revealed that Metabolic pathways, Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, Biosynthesis of plant secondary metabolites, Microbial metabolism in diverse environments, Biosynthesis of amino acids were identified as the main enriched metabolic pathways of differentially expressed metabolites, which are consistent with the previous publications, treated by the various environmental factors. Transcriptome profiling analyses revealed that the alkali concentration of 12 mmol/L has more regulatory effects on the changes of gene expression than the other alkali concentrations. KEGG analysis revealed that Phagosome, Lysosome, Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis, Purine Metabolism, Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, and Endocytosis were identified as the main enriched metabolic pathways in the present study, predicting these metabolic pathways may be involved in the adaption of alkali treatment in M. nipponense. Phagosome, Lysosome, Purine Metabolism, and Endocytosis are immune-related metabolic pathways, while Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis, and Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism are energy metabolism-related metabolic pathways. Quantitative PCR analyses of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) verified the accuracy of the RNA-Seq. Alkali treatment significantly stimulated the expressions of DEGs from the metabolic pathways of Phagosome and Lysosome, suggesting Phagosome and Lysosome play essential roles in the regulation of alkali tolerance in this species, as well as the genes from these metabolic pathways. The present study identified the effects of alkali treatment on gills, providing valuable evidences for the genetic improvement of alkali tolerance in M. nipponense.
Ophthalmic manifestations have recently been observed in acute and post-acute complications of COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our precious study has shown that host RNA editing is linked to RNA viral infection, yet ocular adenosine to inosine (A-to-I) RNA editing during SARS-CoV-2 infection remains uninvestigated in COVID-19. Herein we used an epitranscriptomic pipeline to analyze 37 samples and investigate A-to-I editing associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection, in five ocular tissue types including the conjunctiva, limbus, cornea, sclera, and retinal organoids. Our results revealed dramatically altered A-to-I RNA editing across the five ocular tissues. Notably, the transcriptome-wide average level of RNA editing was increased in the cornea but generally decreased in the other four ocular tissues. Functional enrichment analysis showed that differential RNA editing (DRE) was mainly in genes related to ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic process, transcriptional regulation, and RNA splicing. In addition to tissue-specific RNA editing found in each tissue, common RNA editing was observed across different tissues, especially in the innate antiviral immune gene MAVS and the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase MDM2. Analysis in retinal organoids further revealed highly dynamic RNA editing alterations over time during SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our study thus suggested the potential role played by RNA editing in ophthalmic manifestations of COVID-19, and highlighted its potential transcriptome impact, especially on innate immunity.
Background Detecting structural variations (SVs) at the population level using next-generation sequencing (NGS) requires substantial computational resources and processing time. Here, we compared the performances of 11 SV callers: Delly, Manta, GridSS, Wham, Sniffles, Lumpy, SvABA, Canvas, CNVnator, MELT, and INSurVeyor. These SV callers have been recently published and have been widely employed for processing massive whole-genome sequencing datasets. We evaluated the accuracy, sequence depth, running time, and memory usage of the SV callers.Results Notably, several callers exhibited better calling performance for deletions than for duplications, inversions, and insertions. Among the SV callers, Manta identified deletion SVs with better performance and efficient computing resources, and both Manta and MELT demonstrated relatively good precision regarding calling insertions. We confirmed that the copy number variation callers, Canvas and CNVnator, exhibited better performance in identifying long duplications as they employ the read-depth approach. Finally, we also verified the genotypes inferred from each SV caller using a phased long-read assembly dataset, and Manta showed the highest concordance in terms of the deletions and insertions.Conclusions Our findings provide a comprehensive understanding of the accuracy and computational efficiency of SV callers, thereby facilitating integrative analysis of SV profiles in diverse large-scale genomic datasets.
BackgroundEffective population size (Ne) is a pivotal parameter in population genetics as it can provide information on the rate of inbreeding and the contemporary status of genetic diversity in breeding populations. The population with smaller Ne can lead to faster inbreeding, with little potential for genetic gain making selections ineffective. The importance of Ne has become increasingly recognized in plant breeding, which can help breeders monitor and enhance the genetic variability or redesign their selection protocols. Here, we present the first Ne estimates based on linkage disequilibrium (LD) in the pea genome.ResultsWe calculated and compared Ne using SNP markers from North Dakota State University (NDSU) modern breeding lines and United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) diversity panel. The extent of LD was highly variable not only between populations but also among different regions and chromosomes of the genome. Overall, NDSU had a higher and longer-range LD than the USDA that could extend up to 500 Kb, with a genome-wide average r2 of 0.57 (vs 0.34), likely due to its lower recombination rates and the selection background. The estimated Ne for the USDA was nearly three-fold higher (Ne = 174) than NDSU (Ne = 64), which can be confounded by a high degree of population structure due to the selfing nature of pea.ConclusionsOur results provided insights into the genetic diversity of the germplasm studied, which can guide plant breeders to actively monitor Ne in successive cycles of breeding to sustain viability of the breeding efforts in the long term.
Background Cultured porcine cell lines are powerful tools for functional genomics and in vitro phenotypic testing of candidate causal variants. However, to be utilised for genomic or variant interrogation assays, the genome sequence and structure of cultured cell lines must be realised. In this work, we called variants and used read coverage in combination with within-sample allele frequency to detect potential aneuploidy in two immortalised porcine kidney epithelial (PK15) cell lines and in a pig embryonic fibroblast line.Results We compared two PK15 cultured cells samples: a new American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) sample and one that has been utilised and passaged within the laboratory for an extended period (> 10 years). Read coverage and within-sample allele frequencies showed that several chromosomes are fully or partially aneuploid in both PK15 lines, including potential trisomy of chromosome 4 and tetrasomy of chromosome 17. The older PK15 line showed evidence of additional structural variation and potentially clonal variation. By comparison, the pig embryonic fibroblast line was free from the gross aneuploidies seen in the PK15s.Conclusions Our results show that the PK15 cell lines examined have aneuploidies and complex structural variants in their genomes. We propose that screening for aneuploidy should be considered for cell lines, and discuss implications for livestock genomics.
Background Flowering at the right time is a very important factor affecting the stable annual yield of longan. However, a lack of knowledge of the regulatory mechanism and key genes of longan flowering restricts healthy development of the longan industry. Therefore, identifying relevant genes and analysing their regulatory mechanism are essential for scientific research and longan industry development. Results DlLFY (Dimocarpus longan LEAFY) contains a 1167 bp open reading frame and encodes 388 amino acids. The amino acid sequence has a typical LFY/FLO family domain. DlLFY was expressed in all tissues tested, except for the leaf, pericarp, and pulp, with the highest expression occurring in flower buds. Expression of DlLFY was significantly upregulated at the early flower induction stage in "SX" ("Shixia"). The results of subcellular localization and transactivation analysis showed that DlLFY is a typical transcription factor acting as a transcriptional activator. Moreover, overexpression of DlLFY in Arabidopsis promoted early flowering and restrained growth, resulting in reduced plant height and rosette leaf number and area in transgenic plants. DNA affinity purification sequencing (DAP-Seq) analysis showed that 13 flower-related genes corresponding to five homologous genes of Arabidopsis may have binding sites and be putative target genes. Among these five flower-related genes, only AtTFL1 (terminal flower 1) was strongly inhibited in transgenic lines. Conclusion Taken together, these results indicate that DlLFY plays a pivotal role in controlling longan flowering, possibly by interacting with TFL1.
BackgroundThe emergence of multidrug-resistant termed Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strain, driven by the acquisition of resistance gene mecA imposes a substantial challenge in the treatment and control of their related infections. Although quinolones have historically been effective against both MRSA and methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) strains, the rising resistance to quinolones among S. aureus isolates, particularly in MRSA, has severely curtailed their potency and further narrowed down the therapeutic options. This study aimed to determine the burden of MRSA among isolates, as well as their resistance profile, genotypic characterization, and molecular relatedness through the construction of a phylogenetic tree.Materials and methodsArchived clinical S. aureus isolates from a descriptive, cross-sectional study involving six regional referral hospitals in Dodoma, Songea, Kigoma, Kitete, and Morogoro in the mainland Tanzania and Mnazi Mmoja in Zanzibar were analyzed. Bacterial identification was performed using both classical microbiology and whole genome sequencing on Illumina Nextseq 550 Sequencer. Species identification was done using KmerFinder 3.2, Multilocus Sequence Typing using MLST 2.0, SCCmec typing using SCCmecFinder 1.2, resistance genes using ResFinder 4.1, and phylogenetic relatedness using CSI Phylogeny 1.4.ResultsOut of the 140 isolates analyzed, 69 (49.3%) were identified as MRSA, with 57 (82.6%) exhibiting quinolone resistance. Conversely, 71 isolates were identified as MSSA, and none of them exhibited resistance to quinolones. Spa-typing revealed six spa types, with t355, t1476, and t498 being the most common. Moreover, all (69) MRSA were found to carry SCCmec type IV. The isolates exhibited 14 different sequence types (STs). Notably, ST152 was prevalent among MSSA (50 isolates, 70%), while ST8 was the predominant sequence type among MRSA (58 isolates, 84%). The antimicrobial resistance profile revealed at least three horizontally acquired resistance genes, with blaZ, dfrG, tet(K), and aac (6')-aph (2'') genes being highly prevalent.ConclusionThere is a high genetic diversity among the S. aureus isolates existing in Tanzania regional hospitals, with a concerning burden of quinolone resistance among MRSA isolates. The diversity in resistance genes among MRSA lineages emphasizes the necessity for the development of sustainable antimicrobial stewardship and surveillance to support evidence-based guidelines for managing and controlling MRSA infections in both community and hospital settings.
Background Endemic plants are key to understanding the evolutionary history and enhancing biodiversity within their unique regions, while also offering significant economic potential. The East Asian endemic genus Corchoropsis Siebold & Zucc., classified within the subfamily Dombeyoideae of Malvaceae s.l., comprises three species. Results This study characterizes the complete plastid genomes (plastomes) of C. crenata var. crenata Siebold & Zucc. and C. crenata var. hupehensis Pamp., which range from 160,093 to 160,724 bp. These genomes contain 78 plastid protein-coding genes, 30 tRNA, and four rRNA, except for one pseudogene, infA. A total of 316 molecular diagnostic characters (MDCs) specific to Corchoropsis were identified. In addition, 91 to 92 simple sequence repeats (SSRs) in C. crenata var. crenata and 75 in C. crenata var. hupehensis were found. Moreover, 49 long repeats were identified in both the Chinese C. crenata var. crenata and C. crenata var. hupehensis, while 52 were found in the South Korean C. crenata var. crenata. Our phylogenetic analyses, based on 78 plastid protein-coding genes, reveal nine subfamilies within the Malvaceae s.l. with high support values and confirm Corchoropsis as a member of Dombeyoideae. Molecular dating suggests that Corchoropsis originated in the Oligocene, and diverged during the Miocene, influenced by the climate shift at the Eocene-Oligocene boundary. Conclusions The research explores the evolutionary relationships between nine subfamilies within the Malvaceae s.l. family, specifically identifying the position of the Corchoropsis in the Dombeyoideae. Utilizing plastome sequences and fossil data, the study establishes that Corchoropsis first appeared during the Eocene and experienced further evolutionary divergence during the Miocene, paralleling the evolutionary patterns observed in other East Asian endemic species.
Background Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS), a rare autosomal recessive disorder, is characterized by oculocutaneous albinism, bleeding diathesis, and sometimes severe lung problems and inflammatory bowel disease. Symptoms include skin and hair pigmentation variations, along with visual impairments. Variants in eleven genes encoding protein complexes essential for membrane trafficking and intracellular endosomal transport pathways underlie various recognized HPS subtypes. This study focuses on HPS-9, a subtype of Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome caused by a variant in the BLOC1S6 gene, which is a subunit of the BLOC1 complex. In this study, a novel Copy Number Variation (CNV) in the aforementioned gene in an Iranian family is reported. The study aims to better understand the etiology of HPS-9 symptoms by identifying and confirming the variant and determining whether the gene is expressed despite the deletion. There have only been five reports of this syndrome in the literature thus far. Our novel CNV represents a significant contribution to understanding the genetic basis of HPS-9. Results This study investigates a male patient presenting with albinism. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) identified a homozygous deletion of approximately 350 bp using CNV analysis. The deletion affects the intronic region of the BLOC1S6 gene, causing uncertainties in defining the exact boundaries due to WES limitations. Primer walking and GAP-PCR techniques were used to define the deletion boundaries. Subsequent assessments of this variant across other family members helped identify homozygous affected members and heterozygous carriers. The absence of BLOC1S6 expression in the affected individual was confirmed through Real-time PCR experiments. These findings underscore the importance of understanding the implications for the patient's healthcare and potential therapeutic approaches. Conclusion This study introduces a case of Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome Type 9 (HPS-9) caused by a homozygous deletion in the BLOC1S6 gene. We identified an approximately 7-kb deletion encompassing exon 1 and the intronic region of the gene. The absence of BLOC1S6 expression, confirmed via Real-time PCR, highlights the importance of studying the pathogenicity of the deletion and its impact on the patient's health. Our findings contribute to the sparse knowledge on HPS-9 and underscore the need for further exploration into the genetic causes of this rare disorder.
Background In recent years, there has been a growing interest in utilizing computational approaches to predict drug-target binding affinity, aiming to expedite the early drug discovery process. To address the limitations of experimental methods, such as cost and time, several machine learning-based techniques have been developed. However, these methods encounter certain challenges, including the limited availability of training data, reliance on human intervention for feature selection and engineering, and a lack of validation approaches for robust evaluation in real-life applications.Results To mitigate these limitations, in this study, we propose a method for drug-target binding affinity prediction based on deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. Additionally, we conducted a series of validation experiments and implemented adversarial control experiments using straw models. These experiments serve to demonstrate the robustness and efficacy of our predictive models. We conducted a comprehensive evaluation of our method by comparing it to baselines and state-of-the-art methods. Two recently updated datasets, namely the BindingDB and PDBBind, were used for this purpose. Our findings indicate that our method outperforms the alternative methods in terms of three performance measures when using warm-start data splitting settings. Moreover, when considering physiochemical-based cold-start data splitting settings, our method demonstrates superior predictive performance, particularly in terms of the concordance index.Conclusion The results of our study affirm the practical value of our method and its superiority over alternative approaches in predicting drug-target binding affinity across multiple validation sets. This highlights the potential of our approach in accelerating drug repurposing efforts, facilitating novel drug discovery, and ultimately enhancing disease treatment. The data and source code for this study were deposited in the GitHub repository, https://github.com/mojtabaze7/DCGAN-DTA. Furthermore, the web server for our method is accessible at https://dcgan.shinyapps.io/bindingaffinity/.
BackgroundAustroasiatic (AA)-speaking populations in northern Thailand are of significant interest due to their status as indigenous descendants and their location at the crossroads of AA prehistoric distribution across Southern China, the Indian Subcontinent, and Mainland Southeast Asia. However, the complexity of ethnic identification can result in inaccuracies regarding the origin and migration history of these populations. To address this, we have conducted a genome-wide SNP analysis of 89 individuals from two Lavue and three Lwa-endonym populations. We then combined our outcomes with previously published data to elucidate the genetic diversity and clustering of AA groups in northern Thailand.ResultsOur findings align with existing linguistic classifications, revealing different genetic compositions among the three branches of the Mon-Khmer subfamily within the AA family: Monic, Khmuic, and Palaungic. Although the term "Lua" ethnicity is confusingly used to identify ethnic groups belonging to both Khmuic and Palaungic branches, our genomic data indicate that the Khmuic-speaking Lua living on the eastern side of the region are relatively distant from the Palaungic-speaking Lavue and Lwa populations living on the western side. The Lavue populations, primarily inhabiting mountainous areas, exhibit a genetic makeup unique to the AA family, with a close genetic relationship to the Karenic subgroup of the Sino-Tibetan language family. Conversely, the Lwa and Blang populations, residing in lowland river valleys, display genetic signatures resulting from admixture with Tai-Kadai-speaking ethnic groups.ConclusionUtilizing genome-wide SNP markers, our findings indicate genetic heterogeneity among the Lua, Lavue, and Lwa ethnic groups. The intricate interplay of genetics, cultural heritage, and historical influences has shaped these ethnic communities. Our study underscores the importance of accurate ethnic classifications, emphasizing the use of self-identified endonyms, names created and used by the ethnic groups themselves. This approach respects the AA communities in northern Thailand and acknowledges their significant contributions to advancing our understanding of genetic anthropology.
BackgroundViral diseases are posing threat to annual production and quality of tobacco in China. Recently, tomato spotted wilt orthotospovirus (TSWV) has been reported to infect three major crops including tobacco. Current study was aimed to investigate the population dynamics and molecular diversity of the TSWV. In the current study, to assess and identify the prevalence and evolutionary history of TSWV in tobacco crops in China, full-length genome sequences of TSWV isolates from tobacco, were identified and analyzed.MethodsAfter trimming and validation, sequences of new isolates were submitted to GenBank. We identified the full-length genomes of ten TSWV isolates, infecting tobacco plants from various regions of China. Besides these, six isolates were partially sequenced. Phylogenetic analysis was performed to assess the relativeness of newly identified sequences and corresponding sequences from GenBank. Recombination and population dynamics analysis was performed using RDP4, RAT, and statistical estimation. Reassortment analysis was performed using MegaX software.ResultsPhylogenetic analysis of 41 newly identified sequences, depicted that the majority of the Chinese isolates have separate placement in the tree. RDP4 software predicted that RNA M of newly reported isolate YNKM-2 had a recombinant region spanning from 3111 to 3811 bp. The indication of parental sequences (YNKMXD and YNHHKY) from newly identified isolates, revealed the conservation of local TSWV population. Genetic diversity and population dynamics analysis also support the same trend. RNA M was highlighted to be more capable of mutating or evolving as revealed by data obtained from RDP4, RAT, population dynamics, and phylogenetic analyses. Reassortment analysis revealed that it might have happened in L segment of TSWV isolate YNKMXD (reported herein).ConclusionTaken together, this is the first detailed study revealing the pattern of TWSV genetic diversity, and population dynamics helping to better understand the ability of this pathogen to drastically reduce the tobacco production in China. Also, this is a valuable addition to the existing worldwide profile of TSWV, especially in China, where a few studies related to TSWV have been reported including only one complete genome of this virus isolated from tobacco plants.
Background The issue of male fertility is becoming increasingly common due to genetic differences inherited over generations. Gene expression and evaluation of non-coding RNA (ncRNA), crucial for sperm development, are significant factors. This gene expression can affect sperm motility and, consequently, fertility. Understanding the intricate protein interactions that play essential roles in sperm differentiation and development is vital. This knowledge could lead to more effective treatments and interventions for male infertility.Materials and methods Our research aim to identify new and key genes and ncRNA involved in non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA), improving genetic diagnosis and offering more accurate estimates for successful sperm extraction based on an individual's genotype.Results We analyzed the transcript of three NOA patients who tested negative for genetic sperm issues, employing comprehensive genome-wide analysis of approximately 50,000 transcript sequences using microarray technology. This compared gene expression profiles between NOA sperm and normal sperm. We found significant gene expression differences: 150 genes were up-regulated, and 78 genes were down-regulated, along with 24 ncRNAs up-regulated and 13 ncRNAs down-regulated compared to normal conditions. By cross-referencing our results with a single-cell genomics database, we identified overexpressed biological process terms in differentially expressed genes, such as "protein localization to endosomes" and "xenobiotic transport." Overrepresented molecular function terms in up-regulated genes included "voltage-gated calcium channel activity," "growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor activity," and "sialic acid transmembrane transporter activity." Analysis revealed nine hub genes associated with NOA sperm: RPL34, CYB5B, GOL6A6, LSM1, ARL4A, DHX57, STARD9, HSP90B1, and VPS36.Conclusions These genes and their interacting proteins may play a role in the pathophysiology of germ cell abnormalities and infertility.
BackgroundThe concept of pangenomics and the importance of structural variants is gaining recognition within the plant genomics community. Due to advancements in sequencing and computational technology, it has become feasible to sequence the entire genome of numerous individuals of a single species at a reasonable cost. Pangenomes have been constructed for many major diploid crops, including rice, maize, soybean, sorghum, pearl millet, peas, sunflower, grapes, and mustards. However, pangenomes for polyploid species are relatively scarce and are available in only few crops including wheat, cotton, rapeseed, and potatoes.Main bodyIn this review, we explore the various methods used in crop pangenome development, discussing the challenges and implications of these techniques based on insights from published pangenome studies. We offer a systematic guide and discuss the tools available for constructing a pangenome and conducting downstream analyses. Alfalfa, a highly heterozygous, cross pollinated and autotetraploid forage crop species, is used as an example to discuss the concerns and challenges offered by polyploid crop species. We conducted a comparative analysis using linear and graph-based methods by constructing an alfalfa graph pangenome using three publicly available genome assemblies. To illustrate the intricacies captured by pangenome graphs for a complex crop genome, we used five different gene sequences and aligned them against the three graph-based pangenomes. The comparison of the three graph pangenome methods reveals notable variations in the genomic variation captured by each pipeline.ConclusionPangenome resources are proving invaluable by offering insights into core and dispensable genes, novel gene discovery, and genome-wide patterns of variation. Developing user-friendly online portals for linear pangenome visualization has made these resources accessible to the broader scientific and breeding community. However, challenges remain with graph-based pangenomes including compatibility with other tools, extraction of sequence for regions of interest, and visualization of genetic variation captured in pangenome graphs. These issues necessitate further refinement of tools and pipelines to effectively address the complexities of polyploid, highly heterozygous, and cross-pollinated species.
Climate change is a threat to sustainable livestock production and livelihoods in the tropics. It has adverse impacts on feed and water availability, disease prevalence, production, environmental temperature, and biodiversity. Unravelling the drivers of local adaptation and understanding the underlying genetic variation in random mating indigenous livestock populations informs the design of genetic improvement programmes that aim to increase productivity and resilience. In the present study, we combined environmental, genomic, and phenotypic information of Ethiopian indigenous chickens to investigate their environmental adaptability. Through a hybrid sampling strategy, we captured wide biological and ecological variabilities across the country. Our environmental dataset comprised mean values of 34 climatic, vegetation and soil variables collected over a thirty-year period for 260 geolocations. Our biological dataset included whole genome sequences and quantitative measurements (on eight traits) from 513 individuals, representing 26 chicken populations spread along 4 elevational gradients (6-7 populations per gradient). We performed signatures of selection analyses (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$ {F}_{ST}$$\end{document} and XP-EHH) to detect footprints of natural selection, and redundancy analyses (RDA) to determine genotype-environment and genotype-phenotype-associations. RDA identified 1909 outlier SNPs linked with six environmental predictors, which have the highest contributions as ecological drivers of adaptive phenotypic variation. The same method detected 2430 outlier SNPs that are associated with five traits. A large overlap has been observed between signatures of selection identified by\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$ { F}_{ST }$$\end{document}and XP-EHH showing that both methods target similar selective sweep regions. Average genetic differences measured by \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$ {F}_{ST}$$\end{document} are low between gradients, but XP-EHH signals are the strongest between agroecologies. Genes in the calcium signalling pathway, those associated with the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) transcription factors, and sports performance (GALNTL6) are under selection in high-altitude populations. Our study underscores the relevance of landscape genomics as a powerful interdisciplinary approach to dissect adaptive phenotypic and genetic variation in random mating indigenous livestock populations.
BackgroundEnhanced nutrition during the early calfhood period has been shown to lead to earlier pubertal development in heifer calves. This is of interest as earlier pubertal onset can subsequently facilitate earlier calving which can economically benefit production systems. Reproductive development in heifers is regulated by the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian signalling pathway. In particular the anterior pituitary gland is central to reproductive development, through the dynamics of gonadotropic pulsatility. However, despite clear knowledge of the influence of enhanced dietary intake on subsequent reproductive development, the molecular control governing this response in the pituitary gland within the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian signalling axis in heifer calves is not fully understood. The objective of this study was to examine the effect of an enhanced plane of nutrition during early life on the anterior pituitary gland of heifer calves through both transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. Between 3 and 21 weeks of age, heifer calves were offered either a high (HI, n = 14) or moderate (MOD, n = 14) plane of nutrition, designed to elicit target growth rates of 1.2 and 0.5 kg/d for HI and MOD groups, respectively. All calves were euthanised at 21 weeks of age and anterior pituitary tissue harvested for subsequent use in global transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. Results Average daily gain was affected by diet (P < 0.001) and was 1.18 and 0.50 kg/day, for HI and MOD calves, respectively. RNAseq analysis resulted in the identification of 195 differentially expressed genes (P-adj<0.05; fold change > 1.5), with 277 proteins identified as differentially abundant (P-adj<0.05; fold change > 1.5) between contrasting dietary treatment groups. Biochemical pathway analysis of differentially affected genes and proteins revealed an enrichment for both growth hormone and GnRH signalling pathways (P-adj.<0.05). Additionally, pathway analysis predicted an effect of enhanced dietary intake on endocrine function within the anterior pituitary gland as well as on reproductive system development and function (P-adj.<0.05). ConclusionsResults from this study show that an enhanced dietary intake during early calfhood affected the molecular control of the anterior pituitary gland in heifer calves in early life.
Background Provision of feed is a major determinant of overall profitability in beef production systems, accounting for up to 75% of the variable costs. Thus, improving cattle feed efficiency, by way of determining the underlying genomic control and subsequently selecting for feed efficient cattle, provides a method through which feed input costs may be reduced. The objective of this study was to undertake gene co-expression network analysis using RNA-Sequence data generated from Longissimus dorsi and liver tissue samples collected from steers of two contrasting breeds (Charolais and Holstein-Friesian) divergent for residual feed intake (RFI), across two consecutive distinct dietary phases (zero-grazed grass and high-concentrate). Categories including differentially expressed genes (DEGs) based on the contrasts of RFI phenotype, breed and dietary source, as well as key transcription factors and proteins secreted in plasma were utilised as nodes of the gene co-expression network. Results Of the 2,929 DEGs within the network analysis, 1,604 were reported to have statistically significant correlations (>= 0.80), resulting in a total of 43,876 significant connections between genes. Pathway analysis of clusters of co-expressed genes revealed enrichment of processes related to lipid metabolism (fatty acid biosynthesis, fatty acid beta-oxidation, cholesterol biosynthesis), immune function, (complement cascade, coagulation system, acute phase response signalling), and energy production (oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondrial L-carnitine shuttle pathway) based on genes related to RFI, breed and dietary source contrasts. Conclusions Although similar biological processes were evident across the three factors examined, no one gene node was evident across RFI, breed and diet contrasts in both liver and muscle tissues. However within the liver tissue, the IRX4, NR1H3, HOXA13 and ZNF648 gene nodes, which all encode transcription factors displayed significant connections across the RFI, diet and breed comparisons, indicating a role for these transcription factors towards the RFI phenotype irrespective of diet and breed. Moreover, the NR1H3 gene encodes a protein secreted into plasma from the hepatocytes of the liver, highlighting the potential for this gene to be explored as a robust biomarker for the RFI trait in beef cattle.
Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences that can move or replicate within a genome, and their study has become increasingly important in understanding genome evolution and function. The Tridactylidae family, including Xya riparia (pygmy mole cricket), harbors a variety of transposable elements (TEs) that have been insufficiently investigated. Further research is required to fully understand their diversity and evolutionary characteristics. Hence, we conducted a comprehensive repeatome analysis of X. riparia species using the chromosome-level assembled genome. The study aimed to comprehensively analyze the abundance, distribution, and age of transposable elements (TEs) in the genome. The results indicated that the genome was 1.67 Gb, with 731.63 Mb of repetitive sequences, comprising 27% of Class II (443.25 Mb), 16% of Class I (268.45 Mb), and 1% of unknown TEs (19.92 Mb). The study found that DNA transposons dominate the genome, accounting for approximately 60% of the total repeat size, with retrotransposons and unknown elements accounting for 37% and 3% of the genome, respectively. The members of the Gypsy superfamily were the most abundant amongst retrotransposons, accounting for 63% of them. The transposable superfamilies (LTR/Gypsy, DNA/nMITE, DNA/hAT, and DNA/Helitron) collectively constituted almost 70% of the total repeat size of all six chromosomes. The study further unveiled a significant linear correlation (Pearson correlation: r = 0.99, p-value = 0.00003) between the size of the chromosomes and the repetitive sequences. The average age of DNA transposon and retrotransposon insertions ranges from 25 My (million years) to 5 My. The satellitome analysis discovered 13 satellite DNA families that comprise about 0.15% of the entire genome. In addition, the transcriptional analysis of TEs found that DNA transposons were more transcriptionally active than retrotransposons. Overall, the study suggests that the genome of X. riparia is complex, characterized by a substantial portion of repetitive elements. These findings not only enhance our understanding of TE evolution within the Tridactylidae family but also provide a foundation for future investigations into the genomic intricacies of related species.
BackgroundThe choice of de novo assembler for high-throughput sequencing (HTS) data remains a pivotal factor in the HTS-based discovery of viral pathogens. This study assessed de novo assemblers, namely Trinity, SPAdes, and MEGAHIT for HTS datasets generated on the Illumina platform from 23 apple samples, representing 15 exotic and indigenous apple varieties and a rootstock. The assemblers were compared based on assembly quality metrics, including the largest contig, total assembly length, genome coverage, and N50.ResultsMEGAHIT was most efficient assembler according to the metrics evaluated in this study. By using multiple assemblers, near-complete genome sequences of citrus concave gum-associated virus (CCGaV), apple rubbery wood virus 1 (ARWV-1), ARWV-2, apple necrotic mosaic virus (ApNMV), apple mosaic virus, apple stem pitting virus, apple stem grooving virus, apple chlorotic leaf spot virus, apple hammerhead viroid and apple scar skin viroid were reconstructed. These viruses were further confirmed through Sanger sequencing in different apple cultivars. Among them, CCGaV, ARWV-1 and ARWV-2 were recorded from apples in India for the first time. The analysis of virus richness revealed that ApNMV was dominant, followed by ARWV-1 and CCGaV. Moreover, MEGAHIT identified novel single-nucleotide variants.ConclusionsOur analyses highlight the crucial role of assembly methods in reconstructing near-complete apple virus genomes from the Illumina reads. This study emphasizes the significance of employing multiple assemblers for de novo virus genome assembly in vegetatively propagated perennial fruit crops.
Glucosidase II beta subunit (GluIIss), encoded from PRKCSH, is a subunit of the glucosidase II enzyme responsible for quality control of N-linked glycoprotein folding and suppression of GluIIss led to inhibitory effect of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTKs) activities known to be critical for survival and development of cancer. In this study, we investigated the effect of GluIIss knockout on the global gene expression of cancer cells and its impact on functions of immune cells. GluIIss knockout lung adenocarcinoma A549 cell line was generated using CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing system and subjected to transcriptomic analysis. Among 23,502 expressed transcripts, 1068 genes were significantly up-regulated and 807 genes greatly down-regulated. The KEGG enrichment analysis showed significant down-regulation of genes related extracellular matrix (ECM), ECM-receptor interaction, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) in GluIIss knockout cells. Of 9 CAMs encoded DEG identified by KEGG enrichment analysis, real time RT-PCR confirmed 8 genes to be significantly down-regulated in all 3 different GluIIss knockout clones, which includes cadherin 4 (CDH4), cadherin 2 (CDH2), versican (VCAN), integrin subunit alpha 4 (ITGA4), endothelial cell-selective adhesion molecule (ESAM), CD274 (program death ligand-1 (PD-L1)), Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 (CADM1), and Nectin Cell Adhesion Molecule 3 (NECTIN3). Whereas PTPRF (Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Receptor Type F) was significantly decreased only in 1 out of 3 knockout clones. Microscopic analysis revealed distinctively different cell morphology of GluII beta knockout cells with lesser cytoplasmic and cell surface area compared to parental A549 cells and non-targeted transfected cells.Further investigations revealed that Jurkat E6.1 T cells or human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) co-cultured with GluIIss knockout A549 exhibited significantly increased viability and tumor cell killing activity compared to those co-cultured with non-target transfected cells. Analysis of cytokine released from Jurkat E6.1 T cells co-cultured with GluIIss knockout A549 cells showed significant increased level of angiogenin and significant decreased level of ENA-78. In conclusion, knockout of GluIIss from cancer cells induced altered gene expression profile that improved anti-tumor activities of co-cultured T lymphocytes and PBMCs thus suppression of GluIIss may represent a novel approach of boosting anti-tumor immunity.
This study focuses on the genetic diversity and population structure of Prunus dulcis (almond tree), a crucial agricultural component with widespread cultivation and commercial importance, particularly in Iran, a region with a longstanding tradition of almond cultivation. The diverse almond collection in Iran encompasses many local varieties, breeding selections, rootstocks, and international cultivars. This diversity necessitates advanced genotyping techniques to gain insights into genetic diversity, population structure, and linkage disequilibrium (LD). In this paper, genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) was employed to analyze 62 almond germplasm samples, identifying approximately 63,537 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed across the eight chromosomes of the almond genome. On average, there were 30,225 SNPs per chromosome. The analysis yielded an average polymorphism information content (PIC) of 0.315 and an expected heterozygosity (He) rate of 0.28, indicating a significant level of genetic diversity within the studied almond germplasm. The LD analysis demonstrated a rapid decline, with an average LD decay spanning approximately 300 kb for an r2 value of 0.2. This suggests substantial hybridization among the sampled almond varieties. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and structure analysis could not differentiate genotypes based on geographical origin, providing further evidence of genetic mixing among the studied almond populations. An Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA) highlighted significant genetic diversity within populations but revealed minimal differences. This comprehensive study of Iran's almond genotypes offers valuable insights for future breeding and conservation efforts, emphasizing this agriculturally significant species abundant genetic diversity and intricate population structure.
BackgroundThe recent success of a population control gene drive targeting the doublesex gene in Anopheles gambiae paved the way for developing self-sustaining and self-limiting genetic control strategies targeting the sex determination pathway to reduce and/or distort the reproductive capacity of insect vectors. However, targeting these genes for genetic control requires a better understanding of their genetic variation in natural populations to ensure effective gene drive spread. Using whole genome sequencing (WGS) data from the Ag1000G project (Ag3.0, 3.4 and 3.8), and Illumina pooled amplicon sequencing, we investigated the genetic polymorphism of the intron-4-exon-5 boundary of the doublesex gene in the natural populations of An. gambiae sensu lato (s.l.). ResultsThe analyses showed a very low variant density at the gRNA target sequence of the Ag(QFS)1 gene drive (previously called dsxFCRISPRh) within the populations of West and East Africa. However, populations from the forest area in Central Africa exhibited four SNP at frequencies ranging from 0.011 to 0.26. The SNP (2R:48714641[C > T]) at high frequencies, i.e. 0.26 is identified within the An. coluzzii population from Angola. The analyses also identified 90 low frequency (1 - 5%) SNPs in the genomic region around the gRNA target sequence (intron-4-exon-5 boundary). Three of these SNPs (2R:48714472 A > T; 2R:48714486 C > A; 2R:48714516 C > T) were observed at frequencies higher than 5% in the UTR region of the doublesex gene. The results also showed a very low variant density and constant nucleotide diversity over a five-year survey in natural An. gambiae s.l. populations of Burkina Faso. ConclusionThese findings will guide the implementation of doublesex-targeted gene drives to support the current control tools in malaria elimination efforts. Our methods can be applied to efficiently monitor the evolution of any sequence of interest in a natural population via pooled amplicon sequencing, surpassing the need for WGS.
Background Drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB) is a major threat to global public health. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) is a useful tool for species identification and drug resistance prediction, and many clinical laboratories are transitioning to WGS as a routine diagnostic tool. However, user-friendly and high-confidence automated bioinformatics tools are needed to rapidly identify M. tuberculosis complex (MTBC) and non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), detect drug resistance, and further guide treatment options. Results We developed GenoMycAnalyzer, a web-based software that integrates functions for identifying MTBC and NTM species, lineage and spoligotype prediction, variant calling, annotation, drug-resistance determination, and data visualization. The accuracy of GenoMycAnalyzer for genotypic drug susceptibility testing (gDST) was evaluated using 5,473 MTBC isolates that underwent phenotypic DST (pDST). The GenoMycAnalyzer database was built to predict the gDST for 15 antituberculosis drugs using the World Health Organization mutational catalogue. Compared to pDST, the sensitivity of drug susceptibilities by the GenoMycAnalyzer for first-line drugs ranged from 95.9% for rifampicin (95% CI 94.8-96.7%) to 79.6% for pyrazinamide (95% CI 76.9-82.2%), whereas those for second-line drugs ranged from 98.2% for levofloxacin (95% CI 90.1-100.0%) to 74.9% for capreomycin (95% CI 69.3-80.0%). Notably, the integration of large deletions of the four resistance-conferring genes increased gDST sensitivity. The specificity of drug susceptibilities by the GenoMycAnalyzer ranged from 98.7% for amikacin (95% CI 97.8-99.3%) to 79.5% for ethionamide (95% CI 76.4-82.3%). The incorporated Kraken2 software identified 1,284 mycobacterial species with an accuracy of 98.8%. GenoMycAnalyzer also perfectly predicted lineages for 1,935 MTBC and spoligotypes for 54 MTBC. Conclusions GenoMycAnalyzer offers both web-based and graphical user interfaces, which can help biologists with limited access to high-performance computing systems or limited bioinformatics skills. By streamlining the interpretation of WGS data, the GenoMycAnalyzer has the potential to significantly impact TB management and contribute to global efforts to combat this infectious disease. GenoMycAnalyzer is available at http://www.mycochase.org.
BackgroundDrought poses a major threat to agricultural production and thus food security. Understanding the processes shaping plant responses to water deficit is essential for global food safety. Though many studies examined the effect of water deficit on the whole-root level, the distinct functions of each root zone and their specific stress responses remain masked by this approach.ResultsIn this study, we investigated the effect of water deficit on root development of the spring barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) cultivar Morex and examined transcriptomic responses at the level of longitudinal root zones. Water deficit significantly reduced root growth rates after two days of treatment. RNA-sequencing revealed root zone and temporal gene expression changes depending on the duration of water deficit treatment. The majority of water deficit-regulated genes were unique for their respective root zone-by-treatment combination, though they were associated with commonly enriched gene ontology terms. Among these, we found terms associated with transport, detoxification, or cell wall formation affected by water deficit. Integration of weighted gene co-expression analyses identified differential hub genes, that highlighted the importance of modulating energy and protein metabolism and stress response.ConclusionOur findings provide new insights into the highly dynamic and spatiotemporal response cascade triggered by water deficit and the underlying genetic regulations on the level of root zones in the barley cultivar Morex, providing potential targets to enhance plant resilience against environmental constraints. This study further emphasizes the importance of considering spatial and temporal resolution when examining stress responses.
Background Members of the Planctomycetota phylum harbour an outstanding potential for carbohydrate degradation given the abundance and diversity of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) encoded in their genomes. However, mainly members of the Planctomycetia class have been characterised up to now, and little is known about the degrading capacities of the other Planctomycetota. Here, we present a comprehensive comparative analysis of all available planctomycetotal genome representatives and detail encoded carbohydrolytic potential across phylogenetic groups and different habitats. Results Our in-depth characterisation of the available planctomycetotal genomic resources increases our knowledge of the carbohydrolytic capacities of Planctomycetota. We show that this single phylum encompasses a wide variety of the currently known CAZyme diversity assigned to glycoside hydrolase families and that many members encode a versatile enzymatic machinery towards complex carbohydrate degradation, including lignocellulose. We highlight members of the Isosphaerales, Pirellulales, Sedimentisphaerales and Tepidisphaerales orders as having the highest encoded hydrolytic potential of the Planctomycetota. Furthermore, members of a yet uncultivated group affiliated to the Phycisphaerales order could represent an interesting source of novel lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases to boost lignocellulose degradation. Surprisingly, many Planctomycetota from anaerobic digestion reactors encode CAZymes targeting algal polysaccharides - this opens new perspectives for algal biomass valorisation in biogas processes. Conclusions Our study provides a new perspective on planctomycetotal carbohydrolytic potential, highlighting distinct phylogenetic groups which could provide a wealth of diverse, potentially novel CAZymes of industrial interest.
Background Sturgeon species are living fossils that exhibit unique reproductive characteristics, and elucidation of the molecular processes governing the formation and quality of sturgeon eggs is crucial. However, comprehensive data on the protein composition of sturgeon ovarian fluid (OF) and eggs and their functional significance are lacking. To address this knowledge gap, the aim of the present study was to conduct a comprehensive comparative proteomic analysis of Siberian sturgeon OF and eggs using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Results A total of 617 proteins were identified in OF, and 565 proteins were identified in eggs. A total of 772 proteins showed differential abundance. Among the differentially abundant proteins, 365 were more abundant in OFs, while 407 were more abundant in eggs. We identified 339 proteins unique to OFs and 287 proteins specific to eggs, and further investigated the top 10 most abundant proteins in each. The functional annotation of the OF proteins highlighted their predominant association with immune system processes, including the complement and coagulation cascade, neutrophil and leukocyte-mediated immunity, cholesterol metabolism, and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Analysis of egg proteins revealed enrichment in metabolic pathways, such as oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid metabolism, and protein ubiquitination and translation. OF-specific proteins included extracellular matrix and secretory vesicles, and eggs were enriched in proteins localized to mitochondria and ribosome components. Conclusions This study presents the first comprehensive characterization of the protein composition of sturgeon OF and eggs and elucidates their distinct functional roles. These findings advance our understanding of sturgeon reproduction, OF-egg signaling and the origin of OF proteins. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD044168 to ensure accessibility for further research.
Glycoside hydrolase family 1 (GH1) beta-glucosidases (BGLUs), are encoded by a large number of genes, which participate in the development and stress response of plants, particularly under biotic and abiotic stresses through the activation of phytohormones. However, there are few studies systematically analyzing stress or hormone-responsive BGLU genes in alfalfa. In this study, a total of 179 BGLU genes of the glycoside hydrolase family 1 were identified in the genome of alfalfa, and then were classified into five distinct clusters. Sequence alignments revealed several conserved and unique motifs among these MsBGLU proteins. Many cis-acting elements related to abiotic stresses and phytohormones were identified in the promoter of some MsBGLUs. Moreover, RNA-seq and RT-qPCR analyses showed that these MsBGLU genes exhibited distinct expression patterns in response to different abiotic stress and hormonal treatments. In summary, this study suggests that MsBGLU genes play crucial roles in response to various abiotic stresses and hormonal responses, and provides candidate genes for stress tolerance breeding in alfalfa.
Background The deep-sea cold seep zone is characterized by high pressure, low temperature, darkness, and oligotrophy. Vesicomyidae clams are the dominant species within this environment, often forming symbiotic relationships with chemosynthetic microbes. Understanding the mechanisms by which Vesicomyidae clams adapt to the cold seep environment is significant. Acetylation modification of lysine is known to play a crucial role in various metabolic processes. Consequently, investigating the role of lysine acetylation in the adaptation of Vesicomyidae clams to deep-sea environments is worthwhile. So, a comparative study of lysine acetylation in cold seep clam Archivesica marissinica and shallow water shellfish Ruditapes philippinarum was conducted. Results A total of 539 acetylated proteins were identified with 1634 acetylation sites. Conservative motif enrichment analysis revealed that the motifs -KacR-, -KacT-, and -KacF- were the most conserved. Subsequent gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses were conducted on significantly differentially expressed acetylated proteins. The GO enrichment analysis indicated that acetylated proteins are crucial in various biological processes, including cellular response to stimulation, and other cellular processes ( p < 0.05 and false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.25). The results of KEGG enrichment analysis indicated that acetylated proteins are involved in various cellular processes, including tight junction, motor proteins, gap junction, phagosome, cGMP-PKG signaling pathways, endocytosis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, among others (p < 0.05 and FDR < 0.25). Notably, a high abundance of lysine acetylation was observed in the glycolysis/glycogenesis pathways, and the acetylation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase might facilitate ATP production. Subsequent investigation into acetylation modifications associated with deep-sea adaptation revealed the specific identification of key acetylated proteins. Among these, the adaptation of cold seep clam hemoglobin and heat shock protein to high hydrostatic pressure and low temperature might involve an increase in acetylation levels. Acetylation of arginine kinase might be related to ATP production and interaction with symbiotic bacteria. Myosin heavy chain (Ama01085) has the most acetylation sites and might improve the actomyosin system stability through acetylation. Further validation is required for the acetylation modification from Vesicomyidae clams. Conclusion A novel comparative analysis was undertaken to investigate the acetylation of lysine in Vesicomyidae clams, yielding novel insights into the regulatory role of lysine acetylation in deep-sea organisms. The findings present many potential proteins for further exploration of acetylation functions in cold seep clams and other deep-sea mollusks.
Semen Ziziphi Spinosae (SZS) is a traditional Chinese herbal medicine widely used to treat insomnia and anxiety in clinical practice. Currently, the demand for SZS is increasing every year, but the production of wild SZS is unstable due to environmental factors. Grafting sour jujube scions onto sour jujube or jujube tree stocks can achieve a high production rate within a short period of time. However, the effects of grafting on the quality of SZS have not been reported. This study investigated the differences between wild-type and grafted SZS from three aspects: phenotype, chemical composition, and molecular mechanism. The findings revealed that the grafted specimens were generally larger in morphology and lighter in color than the wild-type samples. The dimensions of both the grafted specimens were generally larger than those of the wild specimens. The HPLC-ELSD results revealed that the three main chemical components in the grafted SZS, namely, spinosin, jujuboside A, and jujuboside B, had higher contents than their wild-type counterparts. Comprehensive transcriptome sequencing analysis and KEGG annotation revealed that DEG enrichment between grafted and wild-type SZS occurred mainly during stress resistance and rootstock scion healing. There were 23 DEGs that may encode enzymes involved in the biosynthetic pathway of flavonoids and 21 genes encoding terpenoid saponins. Further investigation revealed that the expression of the genes C4H, CHS, CHI, and F3'5'H in the flavonoid biosynthesis pat.hway and HMGR, MVK, MVD, and FPPS in the saponin biosynthesis pathway accounted for the difference in quality between grafted and wild SZS. Furthermore, WGCNA identified 15 core genes related to medicinal ingredients between grafted and wild SZS. These results provide support for further research on the differences in the quality of medicinal ingredients between grafted and wild SZS.
BackgroundStudies have identified individual blood biomarkers associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and related phenotypes. However, complex diseases such as COPD typically involve changes in multiple molecules with interconnections that may not be captured when considering single molecular features.MethodsLeveraging proteomic data from 3,173 COPDGene Non-Hispanic White (NHW) and African American (AA) participants, we applied sparse multiple canonical correlation network analysis (SmCCNet) to 4,776 proteins assayed on the SomaScan v4.0 platform to derive sparse networks of proteins associated with current vs. former smoking status, airflow obstruction, and emphysema quantitated from high-resolution computed tomography scans. We then used NetSHy, a dimension reduction technique leveraging network topology, to produce summary scores of each proteomic network, referred to as NetSHy scores. We next performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify variants associated with the NetSHy scores, or network quantitative trait loci (nQTLs). Finally, we evaluated the replicability of the networks in an independent cohort, SPIROMICS.ResultsWe identified networks of 13 to 104 proteins for each phenotype and exposure in NHW and AA, and the derived NetSHy scores significantly associated with the variable of interests. Networks included known (sRAGE, ALPP, MIP1) and novel molecules (CA10, CPB1, HIS3, PXDN) and interactions involved in COPD pathogenesis. We observed 7 nQTL loci associated with NetSHy scores, 4 of which remained after conditional analysis. Networks for smoking status and emphysema, but not airflow obstruction, demonstrated a high degree of replicability across race groups and cohorts.ConclusionsIn this work, we apply state-of-the-art molecular network generation and summarization approaches to proteomic data from COPDGene participants to uncover protein networks associated with COPD phenotypes. We further identify genetic associations with networks. This work discovers protein networks containing known and novel proteins and protein interactions associated with clinically relevant COPD phenotypes across race groups and cohorts.
BackgroundThe allo-octoploid Fragaria x ananassa follows disomic inheritance, yet the high sequence similarity among its subgenomes can lead to misalignment of short sequencing reads (150 bp). This misalignment results in an increased number of erroneous variants during variant calling. To accurately associate traits with the appropriate subgenome, it is essential to filter out these erroneous variants. By classifying variants into correct (type 1) and erroneous types (homoeologous variants-type 2, and multi-locus variants-type 3), we can improve the reliability of downstream analyses.ResultsOur analysis reveals that while erroneous variant types often display skewed average allele balances (AAB) for heterozygous calls, this measure alone is insufficient. To mitigate the erroneous variants further, we employed a Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) based filtering method that correlates highly (99%) with an approach that utilizes a genetic map from a biparental population. This combined filtering strategy-using both LD-based and average allele balance methods-resulted in the lowest switch error rate (0.037). Notably, our best filtering approach decreased phasing switch error rates by 44% and preserved 72% of the original dataset.ConclusionsThe results indicate that identifying erroneous variants due to subgenome similarity can be effectively achieved without extensive genotyping of mapping populations. By implementing the LD-based filtering method, the phasing accuracy improved which improves the tracability of important alleles in the germplasm, paving the way for better understanding of trait associations in F. x ananassa.
BackgroundThe 5' untranslated region of mRNA strongly impacts the rate of translation initiation. A recent convolutional neural network (CNN) model accurately quantifies the relationship between massively parallel synthetic 5' untranslated regions (5'UTRs) and translation levels. However, the underlying biological features, which drive model predictions, remain elusive. Uncovering sequence determinants predictive of translation output may allow us to develop a more detailed understanding of translation regulation at the 5'UTR.ResultsApplying model interpretation, we extract representations of regulatory logic from CNNs trained on synthetic and human 5'UTR reporter data. We reveal a complex interplay of regulatory sequence elements, such as initiation context and upstream open reading frames (uORFs) to influence model predictions. We show that models trained on synthetic data alone do not sufficiently explain translation regulation via the 5'UTR due to differences in the frequency of regulatory motifs compared to natural 5'UTRs.ConclusionsOur study demonstrates the significance of model interpretation in understanding model behavior, properties of experimental data and ultimately mRNA translation. By combining synthetic and human 5'UTR reporter data, we develop a model (OptMRL) which better captures the characteristics of human translation regulation. This approach provides a general strategy for building more successful sequence-based models of gene regulation, as it combines global sampling of random sequences with the subspace of naturally occurring sequences. Ultimately, this will enhance our understanding of 5'UTR sequences in disease and our ability to engineer translation output.
Background Human mitochondrial heteroplasmy is an extensively investigated phenomenon in the context of medical diagnostics, forensic identification and molecular evolution. However, technical limitations of high-throughput sequencing hinder reliable determination of point heteroplasmies (PHPs) with minor allele frequencies (MAFs) within the noise threshold.Results To investigate the PHP landscape at an MAF threshold down to 0.1%, we sequenced whole mitochondrial genomes at approximately 7.700x coverage, in multiple technical and biological replicates of longitudinal blood and buccal swab samples from 11 human donors (159 libraries in total). The results obtained by two independent sequencing platforms and bioinformatics pipelines indicate distinctive PHP patterns below and above the 1% MAF cut-off. We found a high inter-individual prevalence of low-level PHPs (MAF < 1%) at polymorphic positions of the mitochondrial DNA control region (CR), their tissue preference, and a tissue-specific minor allele linkage. We also established the position-dependent potential of minor allele expansion in PHPs, and short-term PHP instability in a mitotically active tissue. We demonstrate that the increase in sensitivity of PHP detection to minor allele frequencies below 1% within a robust experimental and analytical pipeline, provides new information with potential applicative value.Conclusions Our findings reliably show different mutational loads between tissues at sub-1% allele frequencies, which may serve as an informative medical biomarker of time-dependent, tissue-specific mutational burden, or help discriminate forensically relevant tissues in a single person, close maternal relatives or unrelated individuals of similar phylogenetic background.
Background ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter proteins constitute a plant gene superfamily crucial for growth, development, and responses to environmental stresses. Despite their identification in various plants like maize, rice, and Arabidopsis, little is known about the information on ABC transporters in pear. To investigate the functions of ABC transporters in pear development and abiotic stress response, we conducted an extensive analysis of ABC gene family in the pear genome. Results In this study, 177 ABC transporter genes were successfully identified in the pear genome, classified into seven subfamilies: 8 ABCAs, 40 ABCBs, 24 ABCCs, 8 ABCDs, 9 ABCEs, 8 ABCFs, and 80 ABCGs. Ten motifs were common among all ABC transporter proteins, while distinct motif structures were observed for each subfamily. Distribution analysis revealed 85 PbrABC transporter genes across 17 chromosomes, driven primarily by WGD and dispersed duplication. Cis-regulatory element analysis of PbrABC promoters indicated associations with phytohormones and stress responses. Tissue-specific expression profiles demonstrated varied expression levels across tissues, suggesting diverse functions in development. Furthermore, several PbrABC genes responded to abiotic stresses, with 82 genes sensitive to salt stress, including 40 upregulated and 23 downregulated genes. Additionally, 91 genes were responsive to drought stress, with 22 upregulated and 36 downregulated genes. These findings highlight the pivotal role of PbrABC genes in abiotic stress responses. Conclusion This study provides evolutionary insights into PbrABC transporter genes, establishing a foundation for future research on their functions in pear. The identified motifs, distribution patterns, and stress-responsive expressions contribute to understanding the regulatory mechanisms of ABC transporters in pear. The observed tissue-specific expression profiles suggest diverse roles in developmental processes. Notably, the significant responses to salt and drought stress emphasize the importance of PbrABC genes in mediating adaptive responses. Overall, our study advances the understanding of PbrABC transporter genes in pear, opening avenues for further investigations in plant molecular biology and stress physiology.
BackgroundEfficient capture and use of resources is critical for optimal plant growth and productivity. Both shoot and root growth are essential for resource acquisition, namely light and CO2 by the shoot and water and mineral nutrients by roots. Soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.], one of the most valuable crops world-wide, uses an additional strategy, symbiotic N fixation (SNF), for N acquisition. SNF relies on development of specialized root organs known as nodules, which represent a distinct C sink. The genetic diversity of C partitioning in N fixing soybean to shoots, roots, and nodules has not been previously investigated but is valuable to better understand consequences of differential C allocation and to develop genetic resources, including identification of quantitative trait loci (QTLs).ResultsA diversity panel of 402 soybean genotypes was phenotyped outdoors in a deep-tube system without addition of mineral N to measure allocation of biomass to the shoot, root, and nodules, as well as to determine nodule number, mean nodule biomass, and total shoot N accumulation. Wide ranges in phenotypes were observed for each of these traits, demonstrating extensive natural diversity in C partitioning and SNF in soybean. Using a set of 35,647 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers, we identified 121 SNPs tagging 103 QTLs that include both 84 novel and 19 previously identified QTLs for the eight examined traits. A candidate gene search identified 79 promising gene models in the vicinity of these QTLs. Favorable alleles of QTLs identified here may be used in breeding programs to develop elite cultivars with altered C partitioning.ConclusionsThis study provides novel insights into the diversity of biomass allocation in soybean and illustrates that the traits measured here are heritable and quantitative. QTLs identified in this study can be used in genomic prediction models as well as for further investigation of candidate genes and their roles in determining partitioning of fixed C. Enhancing our understanding of C partitioning in plants may lead to elite cultivars with optimized resource use efficiencies.
Background Single-cell sequencing techniques are revolutionizing every field of biology by providing the ability to measure the abundance of biological molecules at a single-cell resolution. Although single-cell sequencing approaches have been developed for several molecular modalities, single-cell transcriptome sequencing is the most prevalent and widely applied technique. SPLiT-seq (split-pool ligation-based transcriptome sequencing) is one of these single-cell transcriptome techniques that applies a unique combinatorial-barcoding approach by splitting and pooling cells into multi-well plates containing barcodes. This unique approach required the development of dedicated computational tools to preprocess the data and extract the count matrices. Here we compare eight bioinformatic pipelines (alevin-fry splitp, LR-splitpipe, SCSit, splitpipe, splitpipeline, SPLiTseq-demultiplex, STARsolo and zUMI) that have been developed to process SPLiT-seq data. We provide an overview of the tools, their computational performance, functionality and impact on downstream processing of the single-cell data, which vary greatly depending on the tool used.Results We show that STARsolo, splitpipe and alevin-fry splitp can all handle large amount of data within reasonable time. In contrast, the other five pipelines are slow when handling large datasets. When using smaller dataset, cell barcode results are similar with the exception of SPLiTseq-demultiplex and splitpipeline. LR-splitpipe that is originally designed for processing long-read sequencing data is the slowest of all pipelines. Alevin-fry produced different down-stream results that are difficult to interpret. STARsolo functions nearly identical to splitpipe and produce results that are highly similar to each other. However, STARsolo lacks the function to collapse random hexamer reads for which some additional coding is required.Conclusion Our comprehensive comparative analysis aids users in selecting the most suitable analysis tool for efficient SPLiT-seq data processing, while also detailing the specific prerequisites for each of these pipelines. From the available pipelines, we recommend splitpipe or STARSolo for SPLiT-seq data analysis.
BackgroundThe myometrium is involved in many processes during pregnancy and the estrous/menstrual cycle. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) can be regulators of the processes occurring in the myometrium. In the present study, we determined the global transcriptome profile of the porcine myometrium during the peri-implantation period and the late luteal phase of the estrous cycle. In addition, we investigated for the first time the influence of PPAR gamma ligands on the transcriptome profile.ResultsThe myometrium of gilts (n = 3) was collected on days 10-11 and 14-15 of pregnancy and on the corresponding days of the estrous cycle. The expression of PPAR gamma was confirmed in the tissue. Based on the mRNA level, further studies were conducted on myometrial explants obtained from pigs at days 14-15 of pregnancy and the corresponding days of the estrous cycle. The tissue sections were incubated in vitro for 6 h in the presence of a PPAR gamma agonist, pioglitazone (P; 10 mu M), or antagonist, T0070907 (T; 1 mu M). To identify the transcription profile of the myometrium, RNA-Seq was performed on the NovaSeq 6000 Illumina platform. This study identified 1082 differentially expressed genes (DEGs; 609 upregulated and 473 downregulated) in the porcine myometrium on days 14-15 of pregnancy compared with the corresponding days of the estrous cycle. During pregnancy, we detected 6 and 80 DEGs related to PPAR gamma agonist and antagonist, respectively. During the estrous cycle, we identified 4 and 17 DEGs for P and T vs. the control, respectively.ConclusionsThe results indicate that the DEGs are involved in a number of processes, including the immune response, prostaglandin synthesis, cell differentiation and communication. In addition, the role of PPAR gamma activity in regulating the expression of genes related to the immune response and hormone synthesis in the porcine myometrium has been demonstrated.
BackgroundWhole exome sequencing (WES) and whole genome sequencing (WGS) have become standard methods in human clinical diagnostics as well as in population genomics (POPGEN). Blood-derived genomic DNA (gDNA) is routinely used in the clinical environment. Conversely, many POPGEN studies and commercial tests benefit from easy saliva sampling. Here, we evaluated the quality of variant call sets and the level of genotype concordance of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small insertions and deletions (indels) for WES and WGS using paired blood- and saliva-derived gDNA isolates employing genomic reference-based validated protocols.MethodsThe genomic reference standard Coriell NA12878 was repeatedly analyzed using optimized WES and WGS protocols, and data calls were compared with the truth dataset published by the Genome in a Bottle Consortium. gDNA was extracted from the paired blood and saliva samples of 10 participants and processed using the same protocols. A comparison of paired blood-saliva call sets was performed in the context of WGS and WES genomic reference-based technical validation results.ResultsThe quality pattern of called variants obtained from genomic-reference-based technical replicates correlates with data calls of paired blood-saliva-derived samples in all levels of tested examinations despite a higher rate of non-human contamination found in the saliva samples. The F1 score of 10 blood-to-saliva-derived comparisons ranged between 0.8030-0.9998 for SNVs and between 0.8883-0.9991 for small-indels in the case of the WGS protocol, and between 0.8643-0.999 for SNVs and between 0.7781-1.000 for small-indels in the case of the WES protocol.ConclusionSaliva may be considered an equivalent material to blood for genetic analysis for both WGS and WES under strict protocol conditions. The accuracy of sequencing metrics and variant-detection accuracy is not affected by choosing saliva as the gDNA source instead of blood but much more significantly by the genomic context, variant types, and the sequencing technology used.
BackgroundCurrently, diverse minipigs have acquired a common dwarfism phenotype through independent artificial selections. Characterizing the population and genetic diversity in minipigs is important to unveil genetic mechanisms regulating their body sizes and effects of independent artificial selections on those genetic mechanisms. However, full understanding for the genetic mechanisms and phenotypic consequences in minipigs still lag behind.ResultsHere, using whole genome sequencing data of 41 pig breeds, including eight minipigs, we identified a large genomic diversity in a minipig population compared to other pig populations in terms of population structure, demographic signatures, and selective signatures. Selective signatures reveal diverse biological mechanisms related to body size in minipigs. We also found evidence for neural development mechanism as a minipig-specific body size regulator. Interestingly, selection signatures within those mechanisms containing neural development are also highly different among minipig breeds. Despite those large genetic variances, PLAG1, CHM, and ESR1 are candidate key genes regulating body size which experience different differentiation directions in different pig populations.ConclusionsThese findings present large variances of genetic structures, demographic signatures, and selective signatures in the minipig population. They also highlight how different artificial selections with large genomic diversity have shaped the convergent dwarfism.
Background Many studies have been performed to identify various genomic loci and genes associated with the meat quality in pigs. However, the full genetic architecture of the trait still remains unclear in part because of the lack of accurate identification of related structural variations (SVs) which resulted from the shortage of target breeds, the limitations of sequencing data, and the incompleteness of genome assemblies. The recent generation of a new pig breed with superior meat quality, called Nanchukmacdon, and its chromosome-level genome assembly (the NCMD assembly) has provided new opportunities.Results By applying assembly-based SV calling approaches to various genome assemblies of pigs including Nanchukmacdon, the impact of SVs on meat quality was investigated. Especially, by checking the commonality of SVs with other pig breeds, a total of 13,819 Nanchukmacdon-specific SVs (NSVs) were identified, which have a potential effect on the unique meat quality of Nanchukmacdon. The regulatory potentials of NSVs for the expression of nearby genes were further examined using transcriptome- and epigenome-based analyses in different tissues.Conclusions Whole-genome comparisons based on chromosome-level genome assemblies have led to the discovery of SVs affecting meat quality in pigs, and their regulatory potentials were analyzed. The identified NSVs will provide new insights regarding genetic architectures underlying the meat quality in pigs. Finally, this study confirms the utility of chromosome-level genome assemblies and multi-omics analysis to enhance the understanding of unique phenotypes.
Background Buruli ulcer (BU) disease, caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans (MU), and characterized by necrotic ulcers is still a health problem in Africa and Australia. The genome of the bacterium has several pseudogenes due to recent evolutionary events and environmental pressures. Pseudogenes are genetic elements regarded as nonessential in bacteria, however, they are less studied due to limited available tools to provide understanding of their evolution and roles in MU pathogenicity. Results This study developed a bioinformatic pipeline to profile the pseudogenomes of sequenced MU clinical isolates from different countries. One hundred and seventy-two MU genomes analyzed revealed that pseudogenomes of African strains corresponded to the two African lineages 1 and 2. Pseudogenomes were lineage and location specific and African lineage 1 was further divided into A and B. Lineage 2 had less relaxation in positive selection than lineage 1 which may signify different evolutionary points. Based on the Gil-Latorre model, African MU strains may be in the latter stages of evolutionary adaption and are adapting to an environment rich in metabolic resources with a lower temperature and decreased UV radiation. The environment fosters oxidative metabolism and MU may be less reliant on some secondary metabolites. In-house pseudogenomes from Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire were different from other African strains, however, they were identified as African strains. Conclusion Our bioinformatic pipeline provides pseudogenomic insights to complement other whole genome analyses, providing a better view of the evolution of the genome of MU and suggest an adaptation model which is important in understanding transmission. MU pseudogene profiles vary based on lineage and country, and an apparent reduction in insertion sequences used for the detection of MU which may adversely affect the sensitivity of diagnosis. Significance Prevention and treatment of Buruli ulcer is still a problem but large whole genome datasets on M. ulcerans are readily available. However, genomic studies fail to thoroughly investigate pseudogenes to probe evolutionary changes in the bacteria, and this can be attributed to the lack of bioinformatic tools. This work studied pseudogenes in Mycobacterium ulcerans (MU) to understand its adapted niche and evolutionary differences across African strains. Our results posit an MU niche-adapted model important in understanding transmission. Also, MU pseudogene profiles vary based on lineage and country, suggesting their influence on pseudogenization patterns in the genome. We further identify a reduction in insertion sequences that are used for the detection of the bacteria which may affect the sensitivity of diagnosis.
Rice black-streaked dwarf virus (RBSDV) is an etiological agent of a destructive disease infecting some economically important crops from the Gramineae family in Asia. While RBSDV causes high yield losses, genetic characteristics of replicative viral populations have not been investigated within different host plants and insect vectors. Herein, eleven publicly available RNA-Seq datasets from Chinese RBSDV-infected rice, maize, and viruliferous planthopper (Laodelphax striatellus) were obtained from the NCBI database. The patterns of SNP and RNA expression profiles of expected RBSDV populations were analyzed by CLC Workbench 20 and Geneious Prime software. These analyses discovered 2,646 mutations with codon changes in RBSDV whole transcriptome and forty-seven co-mutated hotspots with high variant frequency within the crucial regions of S5-1, S5-2, S6, S7-1, S7-2, S9, and S10 open reading frames (ORFs) which are responsible for some virulence and host range functions. Moreover, three joint mutations are located on the three-dimensional protein of P9-1. The infected RBSDV-susceptible rice cultivar KTWYJ3 and indigenous planthopper datasets showed more co-mutated hotspot numbers than others. Our analyses showed the expression patterns of viral genomic fragments varied depending on the host type. Unlike planthopper, S5-1, S2, S6, and S9-1 ORFs, respectively had the greatest read numbers in host plants; and S5-2, S9-2, and S7-2 were expressed in the lowest level. These findings underscore virus/host complexes are effective in the genetic variations and gene expression profiles of plant viruses. Our analysis revealed no evidence of recombination events. Interestingly, the negative selection was observed at 12 RBSDV ORFs, except for position 1015 in the P1 protein, where a positive selection was detected. The research highlights the potential of SRA datasets for analysis of the virus cycle and enhances our understanding of RBSDV's genetic diversity and host specificity.
BackgroundTrihliex transcription factors (TFs) play crucial roles in plant growth and development, stress response, and plant hormone signaling network transmission. In order to comprehensively investigate the functions of trihliex genes in eggplant development and the abiotic stress response, we conducted an extensive analysis of the trihliex gene family in the eggplant genome.ResultsIn this study, 30 trihelix gene family members were unevenly distributed on 12 chromosomes. On the basis of their phylogenetic relationships, these genes were conserved in different plant species and could be divided into six subfamilies, with trihelix genes within the same subfamily sharing similar structures. The promoter regions of trihelix genes contained cis-acting elements related to plant growth and development, plant hormones, and abiotic stress responses, suggesting potential applications in the development of more resistant crops. Selective pressure assessments indicated that trihliex genes have undergone purifying selection pressure. Expression analysis on the basis of transcriptomic profiles revealed that SmGT18, SmGT29, SmGT6, and SmGT28 are highly expressed in roots, leaves, flowers, and fruits, respectively. Expression analysis via quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) revealed that most trihelix genes respond to low temperature, abscisic acid (ABA), and salicylic acid (SA), with SmGT29 exhibiting significant upregulation under cold stress conditions. The SmGT29 gene was subsequently successfully cloned from eggplant, which was located in the nucleus, robust transcriptional activity, and a protein molecular weight of 74.59 kDa. On the basis of these findings, SmGT29 was postulated to be a pivotal candidate gene that actively responds to biotic stress stimuli, thereby supporting the plant's innate stress resistance mechanisms.ConclusionIn summary, this study was the first report on trihelix genes and their potential roles in eggplant plants. These results provided valuable insights for enhancing stress resistance and quality traits in eggplant breeding, thereby serving as a crucial reference for future improvement efforts.
Fatty acids are a requirement for normal development, however, since humans are unable to de novo produce essential fatty acids, they must be obtained from diet. Atlantic salmon is a major dietary source of nutritious and digestible fatty acids. Here, we set out to uncover the genomic basis of individual fatty acids and indices (saturated fatty acids, monounsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, n-3, and n-6) in 208 North American Atlantic salmon, to understand selection potential toward increasing relative quantities of essential fatty acids and to identify candidate genes for future research. Total n-6 (pro-inflammatory) was higher than total n-3 (anti-inflammatory) fatty acids with a ratio of 1 : 1.31 (n-3 : n-6). Heritability of fatty acids ranged from 0 to 0.99, however, most fatty acids and indices had moderate to high heritabilities (ranged from 0.20 to 0.88), implying that selection for improvement of traits could be possible. We found the same significant markers on chromosome 23 (based on false discovery rate thresholds of 2.0e-6 and suggestive significant thresholds of 2.0e-5 in Manhattan plots) in four fatty acids (gamma-linoleic acid, stearidonic acid, dihimo-gamma-linolenic acid, and eicosatrienoic acid), where three genes (sin3b, acbd6, and fads2) are known to be involved in lipid metabolism. These genes, fads2 in particular, would all make ideal candidates for future functional studies. In addition, there were four fatty acids with loci over the suggestive significant threshold with a variety of markers on different chromosomes (lauric acid, stearic acid, eicosatetraenoic acid (ETA), and docosadienoic acid), with associated genes that had relevant functions to fatty acids or adipose cells in general.
Background Mammalian follicle development is characterized by extensive changes in morphology, endocrine responsiveness, and function, providing the optimum environment for oocyte growth, development, and resumption of meiosis. In cattle, the first signs of transcription activation in the oocyte are observed in the secondary follicle, later than during mouse and human oogenesis. While many studies have generated extensive datasets characterizing gene expression in bovine oocytes, they are mostly limited to the analysis of fully grown and matured oocytes. The aim of the present study was to apply single-cell RNA sequencing to interrogate the transcriptome of the growing bovine oocyte from the secondary follicle stage through to the mid-antral follicle stage. Results Single-cell RNA-seq libraries were generated from oocytes of known diameters (< 60 to > 120 mu m), and datasets were binned into non-overlapping size groups for downstream analysis. Combining the results of weighted gene co-expression network and Trendy analyses, and differently expressed genes (DEGs) between size groups, we identified a decrease in oxidative phosphorylation and an increase in maternal -genes and transcription regulators across the bovine oocyte growth phase. In addition, around 5,000 genes did not change in expression, revealing a cohort of stable genes. An interesting switch in gene expression profile was noted in oocytes greater than 100 mu m in diameter, when the expression of genes related to cytoplasmic activities was replaced by genes related to nuclear activities (e.g., chromosome segregation). The highest number of DEGs were detected in the comparison of oocytes 100-109 versus 110-119 mu m in diameter, revealing a profound change in the molecular profile of oocytes at the end of their growth phase. Conclusions The current study provides a unique dataset of the key genes and pathways characteristic of each stage of oocyte development, contributing an important resource for a greater understanding of bovine oogenesis.
Whole genome analysis for microbial genomics is critical to studying and monitoring antimicrobial resistance strains. The exponential growth of microbial sequencing data necessitates a fast and scalable computational pipeline to generate the desired outputs in a timely and cost-effective manner. Recent methods have been implemented to integrate individual genomes into large collections of specific bacterial populations and are widely employed for systematic genomic surveillance. However, they do not scale well when the population expands and turnaround time remains the main issue for this type of analysis. Here, we introduce AMRomics, an optimized microbial genomics pipeline that can work efficiently with big datasets. We use different bacterial data collections to compare AMRomics against competitive tools and show that our pipeline can generate similar results of interest but with better performance. The software is open source and is publicly available at https://github.com/amromics/amromics under an MIT license.
Increasing evidence of brain-immune crosstalk raises expectations for the efficacy of novel immunotherapies in Alzheimer's disease (AD), but the lack of methods to examine brain tissues makes it difficult to evaluate therapeutics. Here, we investigated the changes in spatial transcriptomic signatures and brain cell types using the 10x Genomics Visium platform in immune-modulated AD models after various treatments. To proceed with an analysis suitable for barcode-based spatial transcriptomics, we first organized a workflow for segmentation of neuroanatomical regions, establishment of appropriate gene combinations, and comprehensive review of altered brain cell signatures. Ultimately, we investigated spatial transcriptomic changes following administration of immunomodulators, NK cell supplements and an anti-CD4 antibody, which ameliorated behavior impairment, and designated brain cells and regions showing probable associations with behavior changes. We provided the customized analytic pipeline into an application named STquantool. Thus, we anticipate that our approach can help researchers interpret the real action of drug candidates by simultaneously investigating the dynamics of all transcripts for the development of novel AD therapeutics.
Background One of the most promising approaches for early and more precise disease prediction and diagnosis is through the inclusion of proteomics data augmented with clinical data. Clinical proteomics data is often characterized by its high dimensionality and extremely limited sample size, posing a significant challenge when employing machine learning techniques for extracting only the most relevant information. Although there is a wide array of statistical techniques and numerous analysis pipelines employed in proteomics data analysis, it is unclear which of these methods produce the most efficient, reproducible, and clinically meaningful results. Results In this study, we compared 9 unique analysis schemes comprised of different machine learning and dimensionality reduction methods for the analysis of simulated proteomics data consisting of 1317 proteins measured in 26 subjects (i.e., 13 controls and 13 cases). In scenarios where the sample size is extremely small (i.e., n < 30), all schemes resulted in an exceptionally high level of performance metrics, indicating potential overfitting. While performance metrics did not exhibit significant differences across schemes, the set of proteins selected to be discriminatory between groups demonstrated a substantial level of heterogeneity. However, despite heterogeneity in the selected proteins, their biological pathways and genetic diseases exhibited similarities. A sensitivity analysis conducted using varying sample sizes indicated that the stability of a set of selected biomarkers improves with larger sample sizes within a scheme. Conclusions When the aim of the study is to identify a statistical model that best distinguishes between cohort groups using proteomics data and to uncover the biological pathways and disorders common among the selected proteins, the majority of widely used analysis pipelines perform similarly. However, if the main objective is to pinpoint a set of selected proteins that wield significant influence in discriminating cohort groups and utilize them for subsequent investigations, meticulous consideration is necessary when opting for statistical models, due to the possibility of heterogeneity in the sets of selected proteins.
BackgroundPlants possess a high potential for somatic cell reprogramming, enabling the transition from differentiated tissue to pluripotent callus, followed by the formation of de novo shoots during plant regeneration. Despite extensive studies on the molecular network and key genetic factors involved in this process, the underlying epigenetic landscape remains incompletely understood.ResultsHere, we explored the dynamics of the methylome and transcriptome during the two-step plant regeneration process. During the leaf-to-callus transition in Arabidopsis Ler, CG methylation shifted across genic regions, exhibiting a similar number of differentially methylated regions (DMRs) for both hypo- and hypermethylation. Pericentromeric regions underwent substantial CG and extensive CHH hypomethylation, alongside some CHG hypermethylation. Upon shoot regeneration from callus, genic regions displayed extensive reconfiguration of CG methylation, while pericentromeric methylation levels highly increased across all cytosine contexts, coinciding with the activation of the RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway. However, mutation in DEMETER (DME) DNA demethylase gene resulted in significant genic CG redistribution and global non-CG hypomethylation in pericentromeric regions, particularly during shoot regeneration. This non-CG hypomethylation observed in dme-2 mutants was, at least partly, due to RdDM downregulation. The dme-2 mutants affected gene expression involved in pluripotency and shoot meristem development, resulting in enhanced shoot regeneration through a reprogrammed state established by pericentromeric hypomethylation compared to wild type.ConclusionOur study demonstrates epigenetic changes, accompanied by transcriptome alterations, during pluripotency acquisition (leaf-to-callus) and regeneration (callus-to-de novo shoot). Additionally, it highlights the functions of the DME demethylase, particularly its close association with the RdDM pathway, which underlies pericentromeric non-CG methylation maintenance. These results provide important insights into the epigenetic reconfiguration associated with cell identity transition during somatic cell reprogramming.
Background Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) form mutualistic partnerships with approximately 80% of plant species. AMF, and their diversity, play a fundamental role in plant growth, driving plant diversity, and global carbon cycles. Knowing whether AMF are sexual or asexual has fundamental consequences for how they can be used in agricultural applications. Evidence for and against sexuality in the model AMF, Rhizophagus irregularis, has been proposed. The discovery of a putative mating-type locus (MAT locus) in R. irregularis, and the previously suggested recombination among nuclei of a dikaryon R. irregularis isolate, potentially suggested sexuality. Unless undergoing frequent sexual reproduction, evolution of MAT-locus diversity is expected to be very low. Additionally, in sexual species, MAT-locus evolution is decoupled from the evolution of arbitrary genome-wide loci. Results We studied MAT-locus diversity of R. irregularis. This was then compared to diversification in a phosphate transporter gene (PTG), that is not involved in sex, and to genome-wide divergence, defined by 47,378 single nucleotide polymorphisms. Strikingly, we found unexpectedly high MAT-locus diversity indicating that either it is not involved in sex, or that AMF are highly active in sex. However, a strongly congruent evolutionary history of the MAT-locus, PTG and genome-wide arbitrary loci allows us to reject both the hypothesis that the MAT-locus is involved in mating and that the R. irregularis lineage is sexual. Conclusion Our finding shapes the approach to developing more effective AMF strains and is highly informative as it suggests that introduced strains applied in agriculture will not exchange DNA with native populations.
Radioresistance contributes to metastasis and recurrence in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. To provide novel clues, a complete multi-omics map of a radioresistant cancer cell line has been profiled. In this article, a lung adenocarcinoma cell line, radioresistant A549 (RA549), was generated by exposure to a series of irradiation. Subsequently, we adopted transcriptome, quantitative proteome and lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome to construct a differential profile on the transcriptional to post-tanslational levels on A549 and RA549 cell lines, respectively. Our analysis revealed 920 significantly differentially expressed genes and 699 proteins. Furthermore, 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome identified 30,089 Khib modified sites on 4635 proteins, indicating that Khib modifications play vital role in regulating NSCLC radioresistance. Multi-omics combined analysis identified 19 significantly differentially expressed genes/proteins in total. Meanwhile, we found that EGFR, a well-known lung cancer-related receptor, was upregulated at both the protein and Khib modification levels in RA549. Further gain/loss of function experiments showed that Khib modified EGFR level positively correlates with NSCLC cell radioresistance. Taken together, our findings report that Khib-modified proteins enhanced resistance to radiation and represent promising therapeutic targets.
Objectives Serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 (SGK1) gene encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase that plays an essential role in cellular stress response and regulation of multiple metabolic processes. However, its role in bovine adipogenesis remains unknown. In this study, we aimed to clarify the role of SGK1 in bovine lipid accumulation and improvement of meat quality. Methods Preadipocytes were induced to differentiation to detect the temporal expression pattern of SGK1. Heart, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, muscle and fat tissues were collected to detect its tissue expression profile. Recombinant adenovirus and the lentivirus were packaged for overexpression and knockdown. Oil Red O staining, quantitative real-time PCR, Western blot analysis, Yeast two-hybrid assay, luciferase assay and RNA-seq were performed to study the regulatory mechanism of SGK1. Results SGK1 showed significantly higher expression in adipose and significantly induced expression in differentiated adipocytes. Furthermore, overexpression of SGK1 greatly promoted adipogenesis and inhibited proliferation, which could be shown by the remarkable increasement of lipid droplet, and the expression levels of adipogenic marker genes and cell cycle-related genes. Inversely, its knockdown inhibited adipogenesis and facilitated proliferation. Mechanistically, SGK1 regulates the phosphorylation and expression of two critical proteins of FoxO family, FOXO1/FOXO3. Importantly, SGK1 attenuates the transcriptional repression role of FOXO1 for PPAR gamma via phosphorylating the site S256, then promoting the bovine fat deposition. Conclusions SGK1 is a required epigenetic regulatory factor for bovine preadipocyte proliferation and differentiation, which contributes to a better understanding of fat deposition and meat quality improvement in cattle.
The anthrax-causing bacterium Bacillus anthracis comprises the genetic clades A, B, and C. In the northernmost part (Pafuri) of Kruger National Park (KNP), South Africa, both the common A and rare B strains clades occur. The B clade strains were reported to be dominant in Pafuri before 1991, while A clade strains occurred towards the central parts of KNP. The prevalence of B clade strains is currently much lower as only A clade strains have been isolated from 1992 onwards in KNP. In this study 319 B. anthracis strains were characterized with 31-loci multiple-locus variable-number tandem repeat analysis (MLVA-31). B clade strains from soil (n = 9) and a Tragelaphus strepsiceros carcass (n = 1) were further characterised by whole genome sequencing and compared to publicly available genomes. The KNP strains clustered in the B clade before 1991 into two dominant genotypes. South African strains cluster into a dominant genotype A.Br.005/006 consisting of KNP as well as the other anthrax endemic region, Northern Cape Province (NCP), South Africa. A few A.Br.001/002 strains from both endemic areas were also identified. Subclade A.Br.101 belonging to the A.Br.Aust94 lineage was reported in the NCP. The B-clade strains seems to be vanishing, while outbreaks in South Africa are caused mainly by the A.Br.005/006 genotypes as well as a few minor clades such as A.Br.001/002 and A.Br.101 present in NCP. This work confirmed the existence of the rare and vanishing B-clade strains that group in B.Br.001 branch with KrugerB and A0991 KNP strains.
Klebsiella variicola is considered an emerging pathogen, which may colonize a variety of hosts, including environmental sources. Klebsiella variicola investigated in this study was obtained from an influent wastewater treatment plant in the North-West Province, South Africa. Whole genome sequencing was conducted to unravel the genetic diversity and antibiotic resistance patterns of K. variicola. Whole genome core SNP phylogeny was employed on publicly available 170 genomes. Furthermore, capsule types and antibiotic resistance genes, particularly beta-lactamase and carbapenems genes were investigated from the compared genomes. A 38 099 bp bacteriophage was uncovered alongside with K. variicola genome. Whole genome sequencing revealed that the extended beta-lactamase blaLEN (75.3%) of the beta-lactamase is dominant among compared K. variicola strains. The identified IncF plasmid AA035 confers resistance genes of metal and heat element subtypes, i.e., silver, copper, and tellurium. The capsule type KL107-D1 is a predominant capsule type present in 88.2% of the compared K. variicola genomes. The phage was determined to be integrase-deficient consisting of a fosB gene associated with fosfomycin resistance and clusters with the Wbeta genus Bacillus phage group. In silico analysis showed that the phage genome interacts with B. cereus as opposed to K. variicola strain T2. The phage has anti-repressor proteins involved in the lysis-lysogeny decision. This phage will enhance our understanding of its impact on bacterial dissemination and how it may affect disease development and antibiotic resistance mechanisms in wastewater treatment plants. This study highlights the need for ongoing genomic epidemiological surveillance of environmental K. variicola isolates.
Background Therapeutic targets supported by genetic evidence from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) show higher probability of success in clinical trials. GWAS is a powerful approach to identify links between genetic variants and phenotypic variation; however, identifying the genes driving associations identified in GWAS remains challenging. Integration of molecular quantitative trait loci (molQTL) such as expression QTL (eQTL) using mendelian randomization (MR) and colocalization analyses can help with the identification of causal genes. Careful interpretation remains warranted because eQTL can affect the expression of multiple genes within the same locus. Methods We used a combination of genomic features that include variant annotation, activity-by-contact maps, MR, and colocalization with molQTL to prioritize causal genes across 4,611 disease GWAS and meta-analyses from biobank studies, namely FinnGen, Estonian Biobank and UK Biobank. Results Genes identified using this approach are enriched for gold standard causal genes and capture known biological links between disease genetics and biology. In addition, we find that eQTL colocalizing with GWAS are statistically enriched for corresponding disease-relevant tissues. We show that predicted directionality from MR is generally consistent with matched drug mechanism of actions (> 85% for approved drugs). Compared to the nearest gene mapping method, genes supported by multi-omics evidences displayed higher enrichment in approved therapeutic targets (risk ratio 1.75 vs. 2.58 for genes with the highest level of support). Finally, using this approach, we detected anassociation between the IL6 receptor signal transduction gene IL6ST and polymyalgia rheumatica, an indication for which sarilumab, a monoclonal antibody against IL-6, has been recently approved. Conclusions Combining variant annotation, activity-by-contact maps, and molQTL increases performance to identify causal genes, while informing on directionality which can be translated to successful target identification and drug development.
Background Adipose tissue affects not only the meat quality of domestic animals, but also human health. Adipocyte differentiation is regulated by a series of regulatory genes and cyclins. Four and half-LIM protein (FHL2) is positively correlated with the hypertrophy of adipocytes and can cause symptoms such as obesity and diabetes. Result In the transcriptome sequencing analysis of intramuscular adipocytes after three days of differentiation, the differentially expressed gene FHL2 was found. To further explore the biological significance of the differentially expressed gene FHL2, which was downregulated in the mature adipocytes. We revealed the function of FHL2 in adipogenesis through the acquisition and loss of function of FHL2. The results showed that the overexpression of FHL2 significantly increased the expression of adipogenic genes (PPAR gamma, C/EBP beta) and the differentiation of intramuscular and subcutaneous adipocytes. However, silencing FHL2 significantly inhibited adipocyte differentiation. The overexpression of FHL2 increased the number of adipocytes stained with crystal violet and increased the mRNA expression of proliferation marker genes such as CCNE, PCNA, CCND and CDK2. In addition, it significantly increased the rate of EdU positive cells. In terms of apoptosis, overexpression of FHL2 significantly inhibited the expression of P53 and BAX in both intramuscular and subcutaneous adipocytes, which are involved in cell apoptosis. However, overexpression of FHL2 promoted the expression of BCL, but was rescued by the silencing of FHL2. Conclusions In summary, FHL2 may be a positive regulator of intramuscular and subcutaneous adipocyte differentiation and proliferation, and acts as a negative regulator of intramuscular and subcutaneous adipocyte apoptosis. These findings provide a theoretical basis for the subsequent elucidation of FHL2 in adipocytes.
Background Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are RNA transcripts of more than 200 nucleotides that do not encode canonical proteins. Their biological structure is similar to messenger RNAs (mRNAs). To distinguish between lncRNA and mRNA transcripts quickly and accurately, we upgraded the PLEK alignment-free tool to its next version, PLEKv2, and constructed models tailored for both animals and plants. Results PLEKv2 can achieve 98.7% prediction accuracy for human datasets. Compared with classical tools and deep learning-based models, this is 8.1%, 3.7%, 16.6%, 1.4%, 4.9%, and 48.9% higher than CPC2, CNCI, Wen et al.'s CNN, LncADeep, PLEK, and NcResNet, respectively. The accuracy of PLEKv2 was > 90% for cross-species prediction. PLEKv2 is more effective and robust than CPC2, CNCI, LncADeep, PLEK, and NcResNet for primate datasets (including chimpanzees, macaques, and gorillas). Moreover, PLEKv2 is not only suitable for non-human primates that are closely related to humans, but can also predict the coding ability of RNA sequences in plants such as Arabidopsis. Conclusions The experimental results illustrate that the model constructed by PLEKv2 can distinguish lncRNAs and mRNAs better than PLEK.
Background Skeletal muscle is composed of muscle fibers with different physiological characteristics, which plays an important role in regulating skeletal muscle metabolism, movement and body homeostasis. The type of skeletal muscle fiber directly affects meat quality. However, the transcriptome and gene interactions between different types of muscle fibers are not well understood.Results In this paper, we selected 180-days-old Large White pigs and found that longissimus dorsi (LD) muscle was dominated by fast-fermenting myofibrils and soleus (SOL) muscle was dominated by slow-oxidizing myofibrils by frozen sections and related mRNA and protein assays. Here, we selected LD muscle and SOL muscle for transcriptomic sequencing, and identified 312 differentially expressed mRNA (DEmRs), 30 differentially expressed miRNA (DEmiRs), 183 differentially expressed lncRNA (DElRs), and 3417 differentially expressed circRNA (DEcRs). The ceRNA network included ssc-miR-378, ssc-miR-378b-3p, ssc-miR-24-3p, XR_308817, XR_308823, SMIM8, MAVS and FOS as multiple core nodes that play important roles in muscle development. Moreover, we found that different members of the miR-10 family expressed differently in oxidized and glycolytic muscle fibers, among which miR-10a-5p was highly expressed in glycolytic muscle fibers (LD) and could target MYBPH gene mRNA. Therefore, we speculate that miR-10a-5p may be involved in the transformation of muscle fiber types by targeting the MYHBP gene. In addition, PPI analysis of differentially expressed mRNA genes showed that ACTC1, ACTG2 and ACTN2 gene had the highest node degree, suggesting that this gene may play a key role in the regulatory network of muscle fiber type determination.Conclusions We can conclude that these genes play a key role in regulating muscle fiber type transformation. Our study provides transcriptomic profiles and ceRNA interaction networks for different muscle fiber types in pigs, providing reference for the transformation of pig muscle fiber types and the improvement of meat quality.
Background Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), a novel water treatment agent, can be used for disinfection, water quality adjustment, and disease prevention, while excessive H2O2 can injure farm animals, even leading to death. Hydrogen peroxide is a recommended disinfectant and bactericide for treating gill diseases and vibriosis in the greenfin horse-faced filefish Thamnaconus septentrionalis. However, its cumulative effect, toxic molecular mechanism and relevant signal transduction/metabolic networks in marine fishes are largely unknown.<br /> Results We employed a multi-omics approach to investigate the detrimental effects of 50 mg/L H2O2 exposure (2 h/d) on filefish for 2 d, 4 d, and 6 d. Transcriptome sequencing showed that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were mainly classified into functions such as signal transduction, nervous system, liver and bile acid metabolism, energy metabolism, cell adhesion and communication, inflammation and immune response. Metabolomic analysis found that the significantly changed metabolites (SCMs) were involved in phenylalanine metabolism, inflammatory mediator regulation, linoleic acid metabolism, and necroptosis. The main SCMs were cholic acid, carnitine C12:1, dimethylmalonic acid, glutamic acid, L-lactic acid, shikimic acid, 2-methylsuccinic acid, and others. Moreover, H2O2-induced oxidative stress also disturbs the balance of the gut microbiota, altering the microbial composition and affecting digestive processes.<br /> Conclusions Integrated multiomics analysis revealed that H2O2-induced detrimental impacts include mucosal damage, inflammatory and immune responses, altered energy metabolism, and gut microbiota disorders. These findings offer novel insights into the harmful effects and signal transduction/metabolic pathways triggered by H2O2 exposure in marine fishes.
Food security is important for the ever-growing global population. Soybean, Glycine max (L.) Merr., is cultivated worldwide providing a key source of food, protein and oil. Hence, it is imperative to maintain or to increase its yield under different conditions including challenges caused by abiotic and biotic stresses. In recent years, the soybean pod-sucking stinkbug Riptortus pedestris has emerged as an important agricultural insect pest in East, South and Southeast Asia. Here, we present a genomics resource for R. pedestris including its genome assembly, messenger RNA (mRNA) and microRNA (miRNA) transcriptomes at different developmental stages and from different organs. As insect hormone biosynthesis genes (genes involved in metamorphosis) and their regulators such as miRNAs are potential targets for pest control, we analyzed the sesquiterpenoid (juvenile) and ecdysteroid (molting) hormone biosynthesis pathway genes including their miRNAs and relevant neuropeptides. Temporal gene expression changes of these insect hormone biosynthesis pathways were observed at different developmental stages. Similarly, a diet-specific response in gene expression was also observed in both head and salivary glands. Furthermore, we observed that microRNAs (bantam, miR-14, miR-316, and miR-263) of R. pedestris fed with different types of soybeans were differentially expressed in the salivary glands indicating a diet-specific response. Interestingly, the opposite arms of miR-281 (-5p and -3p), a miRNA involved in regulating development, were predicted to target Hmgs genes of R. pedestris and soybean, respectively. These observations among others highlight stinkbug's responses as a function of its interaction with soybean. In brief, the results of this study not only present salient findings that could be of potential use in pest management and mitigation but also provide an invaluable resource for R. pedestris as an insect model to facilitate studies on plant-pest interactions.
Background Hylurgus ligniperda, a major international forestry quarantine pest, was recently found to have invaded and posed a serious threat to the Pinus forests of the Jiaodong Peninsula in China. Continuous monitoring and vigilance of the early population is imperative, and rapid molecular detection technology is urgently needed. We focused on developing a single-gene-based species-specific PCR (SS-PCR) method. Results We sequenced and assembled the mitochondrial genome of H. ligniperda to identify suitable target genes. We identified three closely related species for detecting the specificity of SS-PCR through phylogenetic analysis based on 13 protein-coding genes (PCGs). Subsequently, we analyzed the evolution of 13 PCGs and selected four mitochondrial genes to represent slow-evolving gene (COI) and faster-evolving genes (e.g. ND2, ND4, and ND5), respectively. We developed four species-specific primers targeting COI, ND2, ND4, and ND5 to rapidly identify H. ligniperda. The results showed that the four species-specific primers exhibited excellent specificity and sensitivity in the PCR assays, with consistent performance across a broader range of species. This method demonstrates the ability to identify beetles promptly, even during their larval stage. The entire detection process can be completed within 2-3 h. Conclusions This method is suitable for large-scale species detection in laboratory settings. Moreover, the selection of target genes in the SS-PCR method is not affected by the evolutionary rate. SS-PCR can be widely implemented at port and forestry workstations, significantly enhancing early management strategies and quarantine measures against H. ligniperda. This approach will help prevent the spread of the pest and effectively preserve the resources of Chinese pine forests.
Background Temperature is a crucial environmental determinant for the vitality and development of teleost fish, yet the underlying mechanisms by which they sense temperature fluctuations remain largely unexplored. Transient receptor potential (TRP) proteins, renowned for their involvement in temperature sensing, have not been characterized in teleost fish, especially regarding their temperature-sensing capabilities. Results In this study, a genome-wide analysis was conducted, identifying a total of 28 TRP genes in the mandarin fish Siniperca chuatsi. These genes were categorized into the families of TRPA, TRPC, TRPP, TRPM, TRPML, and TRPV. Despite notable variations in conserved motifs across different subfamilies, TRP family members shared common structural features, including ankyrin repeats and the TRP domain. Tissue expression analysis showed that each of these TRP genes exhibited a unique expression pattern. Furthermore, examination of the tissue expression patterns of ten selected TRP genes following exposure to both high and low temperature stress indicated the expression of TRP genes were responsive to temperatures changes. Moreover, the expression profiles of TRP genes in response to mandarin fish virus infections showed significant upregulation for most genes after Siniperca chuatsi rhabdovirus, mandarin fish iridovirus and infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus infection. Conclusions This study characterized the TRP family genes in mandarin fish genome-wide, and explored their expression patterns in response to temperature stress and virus infections. Our work will enhance the overall understanding of fish TRP channels and their possible functions.
Background: Non-coding RNA is a key epigenetic regulation factor during skeletal muscle development and postnatal growth, and miR-542-3p was reported to be conserved and highly expressed in the skeletal muscle among different species. However, its exact functions in the proliferation of muscle stem cells and myogenesis remain to be determined. Methods: Transfection of proliferative and differentiated C2C12 cells used miR-542-3p mimic and inhibitor. RT-qPCR, EdU staining, immunofluorescence staining, cell counting kit 8 (CCK-8), and Western blot were used to evaluate the proliferation and myogenic differentiation caused by miR-542-3p. The dual luciferase reporter analysis and rescued experiment of the target gene were used to reveal the molecular mechanism. Results: The data shows overexpression of miR-542-3p downregulation of mRNA and protein levels of proliferation marker genes, reduction of EdU(+) cells, and cellular vitality. Additionally, knocking it down promoted the aforementioned phenotypes. For differentiation, the miR-542-3p gain-of-function reduced both mRNA and protein levels of myogenic genes, including MYOG, MYOD1, et al. Furthermore, immunofluorescence staining immunized by MYHC antibody showed that the myotube number, fluorescence intensity, differentiation index, and myotube fusion index all decreased in the miR-542-3p mimic group, compared with the control group. Conversely, these phenotypes exhibited an increased trend in the miR-542-3p inhibitor group. Mechanistically, phosphatase and tensin homolog (Pten) was identified as the bona fide target gene of miR-542-3p by dual luciferase reporter gene assay, si-Pten combined with miR-542-3p inhibitor treatments totally rescued the promotion of proliferation by loss-function of miR-542-3p. Conclusions: This study indicates that miR-542-3p inhibits the proliferation and differentiation of myoblast and Pten is a dependent target gene of miR-542-3p in myoblast proliferation, but not in differentiation.
BackgroundCostaceae, commonly known as the spiral ginger family, consists of approximately 120 species distributed in the tropical regions of South America, Africa, and Southeast Asia, of which some species have important ornamental, medicinal and ecological values. Previous studies on the phylogenetic and taxonomic of Costaceae by using nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and chloroplast genome fragments data had low resolutions. Additionally, the structures, variations and molecular evolution of complete chloroplast genomes in Costaceae still remain unclear. Herein, a total of 13 complete chloroplast genomes of Costaceae including 8 newly sequenced and 5 from the NCBI GenBank database, representing all three distribution regions of this family, were comprehensively analyzed for comparative genomics and phylogenetic relationships.ResultThe 13 complete chloroplast genomes of Costaceae possessed typical quadripartite structures with lengths from 166,360 to 168,966 bp, comprising a large single copy (LSC, 90,802 - 92,189 bp), a small single copy (SSC, 18,363 - 20,124 bp) and a pair of inverted repeats (IRs, 27,982 - 29,203 bp). These genomes coded 111 - 113 different genes, including 79 protein-coding genes, 4 rRNA genes and 28 - 30 tRNAs genes. The gene orders, gene contents, amino acid frequencies and codon usage within Costaceae were highly conservative, but several variations in intron loss, long repeats, simple sequence repeats (SSRs) and gene expansion on the IR/SC boundaries were also found among these 13 genomes. Comparative genomics within Costaceae identified five highly divergent regions including ndhF, ycf1-D2, ccsA-ndhD, rps15-ycf1-D2 and rpl16-exon2-rpl16-exon1. Five combined DNA regions (ycf1-D2 + ndhF, ccsA-ndhD + rps15-ycf1-D2, rps15-ycf1-D2 + rpl16-exon2-rpl16-exon1, ccsA-ndhD + rpl16-exon2-rpl16-exon1, and ccsA-ndhD + rps15-ycf1-D2 + rpl16-exon2-rpl16-exon1) could be used as potential markers for future phylogenetic analyses and species identification in Costaceae. Positive selection was found in eight protein-coding genes, including cemA, clpP, ndhA, ndhF, petB, psbD, rps12 and ycf1. Maximum likelihood and Bayesian phylogenetic trees using chloroplast genome sequences consistently revealed identical tree topologies with high supports between species of Costaceae. Three clades were divided within Costaceae, including the Asian clade, Costus clade and South American clade. Tapeinochilos was a sister of Hellenia, and Parahellenia was a sister to the cluster of Tapeinochilos + Hellenia with strong support in the Asian clade. The results of molecular dating showed that the crown age of Costaceae was about 30.5 Mya (95% HPD: 14.9 - 49.3 Mya), and then started to diverge into the Costus clade and Asian clade around 23.8 Mya (95% HPD: 10.1 - 41.5 Mya). The Asian clade diverged into Hellenia and Parahellenia at approximately 10.7 Mya (95% HPD: 3.5 - 25.1 Mya).ConclusionThe complete chloroplast genomes can resolve the phylogenetic relationships of Costaceae and provide new insights into genome structures, variations and evolution. The identified DNA divergent regions would be useful for species identification and phylogenetic inference in Costaceae.
Background Hypoxia stress resulted in mortality during the fish aquaculture program, affecting the sustainable development of the aquaculture industry. The Egyptian strain of O. niloticus showed a strong ability to hypoxia. In this study, a Nile tilapia strain that was kept and selected for 45 years by the author's team was used to elucidate the mechanism of the hypoxia response in the liver, including the identification of metabolic pathways and genes, involved in the hypoxia response of this strain. Results The effects of hypoxia stress were detected at 0-hour, 6-hour, and 72-hour time points (0 h, 6 h, 72 h) on tilapia liver at 1 mg/L dissolved oxygen conditions. The blood triglyceride, blood glucose and cholesterol values exhibited significantly different change trends, but the hemoglobin content showed no significant differences between 0 h, 6 h and 72 h (P > 0.05). The activities of catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-PX), total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and acid phosphatase (ACP) in the liver tissue gradually increased at 0 h, 6 h and 72 h (P < 0.05). Histological analyses revealed structural changes in intracellular lipid droplets, nuclear migration and dissolution, and cell vacuolization in liver tissues. Six pathways were identified as the main enriched metabolic pathways according to the transcriptome profiling analysis, which were protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, steroid biosynthesis, peroxisome, PPAR signaling pathway, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and Insulin signaling pathway. The expressions of the important differentially expressed genes were verified by qPCR analysis, including erola, LOC100692144, sqle, cratb, pipox, cpt1a2b, hik and acss2l, ehhadh, prkcz, fasn and plaa, which showed the same expressions trends as those of RNA-Seq. Conclusions The Nile tilapia strain improves the abilities of hypoxia response through energy metabolism. Antioxidant enzyme measurements in the liver indicate that these five antioxidant enzymes play important roles in protecting the body from hypoxic damage. The histological changes in liver cells indicate that the damage caused by hypoxia stress. The immune-related metabolic pathways and energy metabolism-related pathways were obtained by transcriptome profiling, and these metabolic pathways and the differentially expressed genes selected from these metabolic pathways may be involved in the mechanism of hypoxia tolerance in this strain. These findings provide a better understanding of the hypoxia response mechanism of fish, and represent a useful resource for the genetic breeding of O. niloticus.
Background Plant diseases caused by pathogenic fungi are devastating. However, commonly used fungicides are harmful to the environment, and some are becoming ineffective due to fungal resistance. Therefore, eco-friendly biological methods to control pathogenic fungi are urgently needed. Results In this study, a strain, Paenibacillus sp. lzh-N1, that could inhibit the growth of the pathogenic fungus Mycosphaerella sentina (Fr) Schrorter was isolated from the rhizosphere soil of pear trees, and the complete genome sequence of the strain was obtained, annotated, and analyzed to reveal the genetic foundation of its antagonistic ability. The entire genome of this strain contained a circular chromosome of 5,641,488 bp with a GC content of 45.50%. The results of species identification show that the strain belongs to the same species as P. polymyxa Sb3-1 and P. polymyxa CJX518. Sixteen secondary metabolic biosynthetic gene clusters were predicted by antiSMASH, including those of the antifungal peptides fusaricidin B and paenilarvins. In addition, biofilm formation-related genes containing two potential gene clusters for cyclic lactone autoinducer, a gene encoding S-ribosylhomocysteine lyase (LuxS), and three genes encoding exopolysaccharide biosynthesis protein were identified. Conclusions Antifungal peptides and glucanase biosynthesized by Paenibacillus sp. lzh-N1 may be responsible for its antagonistic effect. Moreover, quorum sensing systems may influence the biocontrol activity of this strain directly or indirectly.
BackgroundPumpkin (Cucurbita moschata) is an important vegetable crop that often suffers from low-temperature stress during growth. However, the molecular mechanism involved in its response to chilling stress remains unknown. In this study, we comprehensively investigated the effect of chilling stress in pumpkin seedlings by conducting physiological, transcriptomic, and metabolomic analyses.ResultsUnder chilling stress, there was an overall increase in relative electrical conductivity, along with malondialdehyde, soluble sugar, and soluble protein contents, but decreased superoxide dismutase and peroxidase activities and chlorophyll contents in seedling leaves compared with controls. Overall, 5,780 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 178 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) were identified under chilling stress. Most DEGs were involved in plant hormone signal transduction and the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway, and ERF, bHLH, WRKY, MYB, and HSF transcription factors were induced. Metabolomic analysis revealed that the contents of salicylic acid (SA), phenylalanine, and tyrosine increased in response to chilling stress. The findings indicated that the SA signaling and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways are key to regulating the responses to chilling stress in pumpkins.ConclusionOverall, our study provides valuable insights into the comprehensive response of C. moschata to chilling stress, enriching the theoretical basis of this mechanism and facilitating the development of molecular breeding strategies for pumpkin tolerance to chilling stress.
BackgroundLong noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are integral to a plethora of critical cellular biological processes, including the regulation of gene expression, cell differentiation, and the development of tumors and cancers. Predicting the relationships between lncRNAs and diseases can contribute to a better understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms of disease and provide strong support for the development of advanced treatment methods.ResultsTherefore, we present an innovative Node-Adaptive Graph Transformer model for predicting unknown LncRNA-Disease Associations, named NAGTLDA. First, we utilize the node-adaptive feature smoothing (NAFS) method to learn the local feature information of nodes and encode the structural information of the fusion similarity network of diseases and lncRNAs using Structural Deep Network Embedding (SDNE). Next, the Transformer module is used to capture potential association information between the network nodes. Finally, we employ a Transformer module with two multi-headed attention layers for learning global-level embedding fusion. Network structure coding is added as the structural inductive bias of the network to compensate for the missing message-passing mechanism in Transformer. NAGTLDA achieved an average AUC of 0.9531 and AUPR of 0.9537 significantly higher than state-of-the-art methods in 5-fold cross validation. We perform case studies on 4 diseases; 55 out of 60 associations between lncRNAs and diseases have been validated in the literatures. The results demonstrate the enormous potential of the graph Transformer structure to incorporate graph structural information for uncovering lncRNA-disease unknown correlations.ConclusionsOur proposed NAGTLDA model can serve as a highly efficient computational method for predicting biological information associations.
In forensic genetics, utilizing massively parallel sequencing (MPS) to analyze short tandem repeats (STRs) has demonstrated several advantages compared to conventional capillary electrophoresis (CE). Due to the current technical limitations, although flanking region polymorphisms had been mentioned in several previous studies, most studies focused on the core repeat regions of STRs or the variations in the adjacent flanking regions. In this study, we developed an MPS system consisting of two sets of multiplex PCR systems to detect not only the STR core repeat regions but also to observe variants located at relatively distant positions in the flanking regions. The system contained 42 commonly used forensic STRs, including 21 autosomal STRs (A-STRs) and 21 Y-chromosomal STRs (Y-STRs), and a total of 350 male individuals from a Chinese Han population were genotyped. The length and sequence variants per locus were tallied and categorized based on length (length-based, LB), sequence without flanking region (core repeat regions sequence-based, RSB), and sequence with flanking region (core repeat and flanking regions sequence-based, FSB), respectively. Allele frequencies, Y-haplotype frequencies, and forensic parameters were calculated based on LB, RSB, and FSB, respectively, to evaluate the improvement in discrimination power, heterozygosity, and effectiveness of forensic systems. The results suggested the sequence variations have more influence on A-STRs and could improve the identification ability of MPS-STR genotyping. Concordance between MPS and CE methods was confirmed by using commercial CE-based STR kits. The impact of flanking region variations on STR genotype analysis and potential factors contributing to discordances were discussed. A total of 58 variations in the flanking regions (53 SNPs/SNVs and 5 InDels) were observed and most variations (48/58) were distributed in A-STRs. In summary, this study delved deeper into the genetic information of forensic commonly used STR and advanced the application of massively parallel sequencing in forensic genetics.
BackgroundTuber starch and steroidal glycoalkaloid (SGA)-related traits have been consistently prioritized in potato breeding, while allelic variation pattern of genes that underlie these traits is less explored.ResultsHere, we focused on the genes involved in two important metabolic pathways in the potato: starch metabolism and SGA biosynthesis. We identified 119 genes consisting of 81 involved in starch metabolism and 38 in the biosynthesis of steroidal glycoalkaloids, and discovered 96,166 allelic variants among 2,169 gene haplotypes in six autotetraploid potato genomes. Comparative analyses revealed an uneven distribution of allelic variants among gene haplotypes and that the vast majority of deleterious mutations in these genes are retained in heterozygous state in the autotetraploid potato genomes. Leveraging full-length cDNA sequencing data, we find that approximately 70% of haplotypes of the 119 genes are transcribable. Population genetic analyses identify starch and SGA biosynthetic genes that are potentially conserved or diverged between potato varieties with varying starch or SGA content.ConclusionsThese results deepen the understanding of haplotypic diversity within functionally important genes in autotetraploid genomes and may facilitate functional characterization of genes or haplotypes contributing to traits related to starch and SGA in potato.
Background Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) are involved in plant growth and development as well as in response to environmental changes, by dynamically regulating gene acetylation levels. Although there have been numerous reports on the identification and function of HDAC and HAT in herbaceous plants, there are fewer report related genes in woody plants under drought stress. Results In this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis of the HDAC and HAT families in Populus trichocarpa, including phylogenetic analysis, gene structure, conserved domains, and expression analysis. A total of 16 PtrHDACs and 12 PtrHATs were identified in P. trichocarpa genome. Analysis of cis-elements in the promoters of PtrHDACs and PtrHATs revealed that both gene families could respond to a variety of environmental signals, including hormones and drought. Furthermore, real time quantitative PCR indicated that PtrHDA906 and PtrHAG3 were significantly responsive to drought. PtrHDA906, PtrHAC1, PtrHAC3, PtrHAG2, PtrHAG6 and PtrHAF1 consistently responded to abscisic acid, methyl jasmonate and salicylic acid under drought conditions. Conclusions Our study demonstrates that PtrHDACs and PtrHATs may respond to drought through hormone signaling pathways, which helps to reveal the hub of acetylation modification in hormone regulation of abiotic stress.
Background Nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) plays a vital role in numerous biological processes as well as responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. However, its function in ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe), a significant medicinal and dietary vegetable, remains largely unexplored. Although the NF-Y family has been thoroughly identified in many plant species, and the function of individual NF-Y TFs has been characterized, there is a paucity of knowledge concerning this family in ginger. Methods We identified the largest number of NF-Y genes in the ginger genome using two BLASTP methods as part of our ginger genome research project. The conserved motifs of NF-Y proteins were analyzed through this process. To examine gene duplication events, we employed the Multiple Collinearity Scan toolkit (MCScanX). Syntenic relationships of NF-Y genes were mapped using the Dual Synteny Plotter software. Multiple sequence alignments were performed with MUSCLE under default parameters, and the resulting alignments were used to generate a maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree with the MEGA X program. RNA-seq analysis was conducted on collected samples, and statistical analyses were performed using Sigma Plot v14.0 (SYSTAT Software, USA). Results In this study, the ginger genome was utilized to identify 36 NF-Y genes (10 ZoNF-YAs, 16 ZoNF-YBs, and 10 ZoNF-YCs), which were renamed based on their chromosomal distribution. Ten distinct motifs were identified within the ZoNF-Y genes, with certain unique motifs being vital for gene function. By analyzing their chromosomal location, gene structure, conserved protein motifs, and gene duplication events, we gained a deeper understanding of the evolutionary characteristics of these ZoNF-Y genes. Detailed analysis of ZoNF-Y gene expression patterns across various tissues, performed through RNA-seq and qRT-PCR, revealed their significant role in regulating ginger rhizome and flower growth and development. Additionally, we identified the ZoNF-Y family genes that responded to abiotic stresses. Conclusion This study represents the first identification of the ZoNF-Y family in ginger. Our findings contribute to research on evolutionary characteristics and provide a better understanding of the molecular basis for development and abiotic stress response. Furthermore, it lays the foundation for further functional characterization of ZoNF-Y genes with an aim of ginger crop improvement.
BackgroundNon-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has rapidly become the most common cause of chronic liver disease in children and adolescents, but its etiology remains largely unknown. Adrenarche is a critical phase for hormonal changes, and any disturbance during this period has been linked to metabolic disorders, including obesity and dyslipidemia. However, whether there is a causal linkage between adrenarche disturbance and the increasing prevalence of NAFLD in children remains unclear.ResultsUsing the young female rat as a model, we found that the liver undergoes a transient slowdown period of growth along with the rise of adrenal-derived sex steroid precursors during adrenarche. Specifically blocking androgen actions across adrenarche phase using androgen receptor antagonist flutamide largely increased liver weight by 47.97% and caused marked fat deposition in liver, thus leading to severe NAFLD in young female rats. Conversely, further administrating nonaromatic dihydrotestosterone (DHT) into young female rats across adrenarche phase could effectively reduce liver fat deposition. But, administration of the aromatase inhibitor, formestane across adrenarche had minimal effects on hepatic de novo fatty acid synthesis and liver fat deposition, suggesting adrenal-derived sex steroid precursors exert their anti-NAFLD effects in young females by converting into active androgens rather than into active estrogens. Mechanistically, transcriptomic profiling and integrated data analysis revealed that active androgens converted from the adrenal sex steroid precursors prevent NAFLD in young females primarily by inactivating hepatic sterol regulatory element-binding transcription factor 1 (Srebf1) signaling.ConclusionsWe firstly evidenced that adrenarche-accompanied rise of sex steroid precursors plays a predominant role in preventing the incidence of NAFLD in young females by converting into active androgens and inactivating hepatic Srebf1 signaling. Our novel finding provides new insights into the etiology of NAFLD and is crucial in developing effective prevention and management strategies for NAFLD in children.
Background Black spot disease in tree peony caused by the fungal necrotroph A. alternata, is a primary limiting factor in the production of the tree peony. The intricate molecular mechanisms underlying the tree peony resistance to A. alternata have not been thoroughly investigated. Results The present study utilized high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) technology to conduct global expression profiling, revealing an intricate network of genes implicated in the interaction between tree peony and A. alternata. RNA-Seq libraries were constructed from leaf samples and high-throughput sequenced using the BGISEQ-500 sequencing platform. Six distinct libraries were characterized. M1, M2 and M3 were derived from leaves that had undergone mock inoculation, while I1, I2 and I3 originated from leaves that had been inoculated with the pathogen. A range of 10.22-11.80 gigabases (Gb) of clean bases were generated, comprising 68,131,232 - 78,633,602 clean bases and 56,677 - 68,996 Unigenes. A grand total of 99,721 Unigenes were acquired, boasting a mean length of 1,266 base pairs. All these 99,721 Unigenes were annotated in various databases, including NR (Non-Redundant, 61.99%), NT (Nucleotide, 45.50%), SwissProt (46.32%), KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, 49.33%), KOG (clusters of euKaryotic Orthologous Groups, 50.18%), Pfam (Protein family, 47.16%), and GO (Gene Ontology, 34.86%). In total, 66,641 (66.83%) Unigenes had matches in at least one database. By conducting a comparative transcriptome analysis of the mock- and A. alternata-infected sample libraries, we found differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that are related to phytohormone signalling, pathogen recognition, active oxygen generation, and circadian rhythm regulation. Furthermore, multiple different kinds of transcription factors were identified. The expression levels of 10 selected genes were validated employing qRT-PCR (quantitative real-time PCR) to confirm RNA-Seq data. Conclusions A multitude of transcriptome sequences have been generated, thus offering a valuable genetic repository for further scholarly exploration on the immune mechanisms underlying the tree peony infected by A. alternata. While the expression of most DEGs increased, a few DEGs showed decreased expression.
BackgroundAvocado, a fruit crop renowned for its high nutritional value, has seen a steadily increasing market demand. However, breeding efforts for avocados have lagged those for other commercial fruits due to limited genomic research and germplasm resources. To address this shortfall, a genome-wide association study was conducted on 122 avocado accessions from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Research Service (ARS) Subtropical Horticultural Research Station (SHRS) germplasm collection. The study aimed to identify genetic markers and regions associated with various morphometric traits in avocado fruits, including fruit weight, length, width, diameter, seed weight, seed length, seed width, fruit seed ratio (FSR), and fruit shape index (FSI).ResultsLeveraging 4,226 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers obtained from genotyping arrays, fifteen markers were identified with strong associations with these traits, utilizing Bayesian-information and Linkage-disequilibrium Iteratively Nested Keyway (BLINK) and Fixed and random model Circulating Probability Unification (FarmCPU) models. Gene annotation analyses within a 200-kb window in the vicinity of significant SNPs revealed several genes associated with various metabolic pathways suggesting that some of them likely determine these fruit quality traits, which needs to be verified and validated. Our results, which were conducted at one location, provide directions for conducting future studies using high-resolution genotyping and long-term multi-year and multi-location trait evaluations for precisely identifying the causal SNP(s) and genes associated with these traits.ConclusionsThese markers reported in this manuscript provide valuable tools for applying marker-assisted selection (MAS) in avocado breeding programs aimed at enhancing fruit quality and value.
BackgroundPangolin is one of the most endangered mammals with many peculiar characteristics, yet the understanding of its sensory systems is still superficial. Studying the genomic basis of adaptation and evolution of pangolin's sensory system is expected to provide further potential assistance for their conservation in the future.ResultsIn this study, we performed a comprehensive comparative genomic analysis to explore the signature of sensory adaptation and evolution in pangolins. By comparing with the aardvark, Cape golden mole, and short-beaked echidna, 124 and 152 expanded gene families were detected in the genome of the Chinese and Malayan pangolins, respectively. The enrichment analyses showed olfactory-related genomic convergence among five concerned mammals. We found 769 and 733 intact OR genes, and 704 and 475 OR pseudogenes in the Chinese and Malayan pangolin species, respectively. Compared to other mammals, far more intact members of OR6 and OR14 were identified in pangolins, particularly for four genes with large copy numbers (OR6C2, OR14A2, OR14C36, and OR14L1). On the genome-wide scale, 1,523, 1,887, 1,110, and 2,732 genes were detected under positive selection (PSGs), intensified selection (ISGs), rapid evolution (REGs), and relaxed selection (RSGs) in pangolins. GO terms associated with visual perception were enriched in PSGs, ISGs, and REGs. Those related to rhythm and sound perception were enriched in both ISGs and REGs, ear development and morphogenesis were enriched in ISGs, and mechanical stimulus and temperature adaptation were enriched in RSGs. The convergence of two vision-related PSGs (OPN4 and ATXN7), with more than one parallel substituted site, was detected among five concerned mammals. Additionally, the absence of intact genes of PKD1L3, PKD2L1, and TAS1R2 and just six single-copy TAS2Rs (TAS2R1, TAS2R4, TAS2R7, TAS2R38, TAS2R40, and TAS2R46) were found in pangolins. Interestingly, we found two large insertions in TAS1R3, distributed in the N-terminal ectodomain, just in pangolins.ConclusionsWe found new features related to the adaptation and evolution of pangolin-specific sensory characteristics across the genome. These are expected to provide valuable and useful genome-wide genetic information for the future breeding and conservation of pangolins.
BackgroundWith increasing global limate warm, high temperature (HT) is one of limiting factors for soybean yield and quality. Exploring HT resistance-related functional genes and their corresponding molecular mechanisms is of great value. In our previous report, compared with HD14 (HT sensitive), JD21 is an HT-resistant variety, and further analysis of the transcriptome and proteome has revealed the HT tolerance mechanism of JD21 anthers. We found that compared with those of HD14 (28.72%), the leaves of JD21 also exhibited HT resistance, and the degree of leaf wilting in JD21 plants after HT stress treatment was 11.02%; however, the regulatory mechanism of the response of JD21 to HT stress is still unclear.ResultsIn this study, comparative transcriptome analysis of JD21 and HD14 soybean leaves after HT stress and field control plants was performed by RNA-seq analysis. The results showed that the number of upregulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in JD21 and HD14 was greater than the number of downregulated DEGs after HT stress, and the number of up- or down-regulated DEGs in JD21 was higher than those of HD14. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that many DEGs were involved in various molecular functions and metabolic pathways. QRT-PCR analysis verified that the gene expression pattern results determined via RNA-seq was reliable. In addition, through analysis of gene expression level and conserved domain, 18 key candidate genes related to the response of soybean leaves to HT stress were screened.ConclusionsThis study systematically revealed the regulation mechanism of soybean leaves molecular transcription level by RNA-seq, and several key candidate DEGs (transcription factor, HSPs, HSFs, GmCYP78A6, etc.) involved in the response to HT stress were identified based on the bioinformatics analysis. The results provided a theoretical basis for studying the response mechanism of soybean leaves to HT stress.
BackgroundComplex genomic rearrangements (CGRs) drive the restructuring of chromatin architecture, resulting in significant interactions among rearranged fragments, visible as anomalous interaction blocks in chromatin contact maps generated by chromosome conformation capture technologies such as Hi-C. These blocks not only offer the orientation and genome coordinates of rearranged fragments but also filter out false positive CGRs, thereby facilitating CGR assembly. Despite this, there is a lack of interactive graphical software tailored for this purpose.ResultsWe present DeCGR, a user-friendly Python toolbox specifically designed for deciphering CGRs in Hi-C data. DeCGR consists of four independent execution components. The Breakpoint Filtering module identifies and filters simple rearrangements, providing the coordinates of rearrangement breakpoints. The Fragment Assembly module automatically assembles CGRs and visualizes the assembly process, facilitating the direct association between anomalous interaction blocks and CGR events. The Validation CGRs module verifies the completeness and accuracy of CGRs by generating the Hi-C map with CGRs through a simulation process and examines the difference from the original Hi-C maps. This module displays both the original and the simulated Hi-C map with highlighted rearranged fragment boundaries for rapid review to assess the CGRs. Finally, the Reconstruct Hi-C Map module provides the reconstructed Hi-C map based on the determined CGRs, allowing users to directly observe the impact of rearrangements on chromatin structure.ConclusionsDeCGR is designed specifically for biologists who aim to explore CGRs from Hi-C data. It provides a validation module to ensure the completeness and correctness of CGRs. Additionally, it allows users to generate CGR assembly results and reconstruct the Hi-C map with just one click. DeCGR provides intuitive visualization results for each module, allowing users to easily associate CGRs with Hi-C maps. DeCGR is operable through a user-friendly graphical interface. Source codes are freely available at https://github.com/GaoLabXDU/DeCGR.
BackgroundHollow heart is a kind of physiological defect that seriously affects the yield, quality, and economic value of cucumber. However, the formation of hollow hearts may relate to multiple factors in cucumber, and it is necessary to conduct analysis.ResultsIn this study, hollow and non-hollow fruits of cucumber K07 were used for comparative transcriptome sequencing and analysis. 253 differentially expressed genes and 139 transcription factors were identified as being associated with the formation of hollow hearts. Hormone (auxin) signaling and cell wall biosynthesis were mainly enriched in GO and KEGG pathways. Expression levels of key genes involved in indole-3-acetic acid biosynthesis in carpel were lower in the hollow fruits than non-hollow fruits, while there was no difference in the flesh. The concentration of indole-3-acetic also showed lower in the carpel than flesh. The biosynthetic pathway and content analysis of the main components of the cell wall found that lignin biosynthesis had obvious regularity with hollow heart, followed by hemicellulose and cellulose. Correlation analysis showed that there may be an interaction between auxin and cell wall biosynthesis, and they collectively participate in the formation of hollow hearts in cucumber. Among the differentially expressed transcription factors, MYB members were the most abundant, followed by NAC, ERF, and bHLH.ConclusionsThe results and analyses showed that the low content of auxin in the carpel affected the activity of enzymes related to cell wall biosynthesis at the early stage of fruit development, resulting in incomplete development of carpel cells, thus forming a hollow heart in cucumber. Some transcription factors may play regulatory roles in this progress. The results may enrich the theory of the formation of hollow hearts and provide a basis for future research.
BackgroundPepper (Capsicum pubescens), one of five domesticated pepper species, has unique characteristics, such as numerous hairs on the epidermis of its leaves and stems, black seeds, and vibrant purple flowers. To date, no studies have reported on the complete assembly of the mitochondrial genome (mitogenome) of C. pubescens. Understanding the mitogenome is crucial for further research on C. pubescens.ResultsIn our study, we successfully assembled the first mitogenome of C. pubescens, which was assigned the GenBank accession number OP957066. This mitogenome has a length of 454,165 bp and exhibits the typical circular structure observed in most mitogenomes. We annotated a total of 70 genes, including 35 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 30 tRNA genes, 3 rRNA genes, and 2 pseudogenes. Compared to the other three pepper mitogenomes (KJ865409, KJ865410, and MN196478), C. pubescens OP957066 exhibited four unique PCGs (atp4, atp8, mttB, and rps1), while two PCGs (rpl10 and rps3) were absent. Notably, each of the three pepper mitogenomes from C. annuum (KJ865409, KJ865410, and MN196478) experienced the loss of four PCGs (atp4, atp8, mttB, and rps1). To further explore the evolutionary relationships, we reconstructed a phylogenetic tree using the mitogenomes of C. pubescens and fourteen other species. Structural comparison and synteny analysis of the above four pepper mitogenomes revealed that C. pubescens shares high sequence similarity with KJ865409 and that C. pubescens has rearranged with the other three pepper mitogenomes. Interestingly, we observed 72 similar sequences between the mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes, which accounted for 12.60% of the mitogenome, with a total length of 57,207 bp. These sequences encompassed 12 tRNA genes and the rRNA gene (rrn18). Remarkably, selective pressure analysis suggested that the nad5 gene underwent obvious positive selection. Furthermore, a single-base mutation in three genes (nad1, nad2, and nad4) resulted in an amino acid change.ConclusionThis study provides a high-quality mitogenome of pepper, providing valuable molecular data for future investigations into the exchange of genetic information between pepper organelle genomes.
Squamous promoter binding protein-like (SPL) genes encode plant-specific transcription factors (TFs) that play essential roles in modulating plant growth, development, and stress response. Pea (Pisum sativum L.) is a coarse grain crop of great importance in food production, biodiversity conservation and molecular genetic research, providing genetic information and nutritional resources for improving agricultural production and promoting human health. However, only limited researches on the structure and functions of SPL genes exist in pea (PsSPLs). In this study, we identified 22 PsSPLs and conducted a genome-wide analysis of their physical characteristics, chromosome distribution, gene structure, phylogenetic evolution and gene expression patterns. As a result, the PsSPLs were unevenly distributed on the seven chromosomes of pea and harbored the SBP domain, which is composed of approximately 76 amino acid residues. The phylogenetic analysis revealed that the PsSPLs clustered into eight subfamilies and showed high homology with SPL genes in soybean. Further analysis showed the presence of segmental duplications in the PsSPLs. The expression patterns of 22 PsSPLs at different tissues, developmental stages and under various stimulus conditions were evaluated by qRT-PCR method. It was found that the expression patterns of PsSPLs from the same subfamily were similar in different tissues, the transcripts of most PsSPLs reached the maximum peak value at 14 days after anthesis in the pod. Abiotic stresses can cause significantly up-regulated PsSPL19 expression with spatiotemporal specificity, in addition, four plant hormones can cause the up-regulated expression of most PsSPLs including PsSPL19 in a time-dependent manner. Therefore, PsSPL19 could be a key candidate gene for signal transduction during pea growth and development, pod formation, abiotic stress and plant hormone response. Our findings should provide insights for the elucidating of development regulation mechanism and breeding for resistance to abiotic stress pea.
BackgroundAtrial fibrillation (AF) stands as a prevalent and detrimental arrhythmic disorder, characterized by intricate pathophysiological mechanisms. The availability of reliable and reproducible AF models is pivotal in unraveling the underlying mechanisms of this complex condition. Unfortunately, the researchers are still confronted with the absence of consistent in vitro AF models, hindering progress in this crucial area of research.MethodsHuman induced pluripotent stem cells derived atrial myocytes (hiPSC-AMs) were generated based on the GiWi methods and were verified by whole-cell patch clamp, immunofluorescent staining, and flow cytometry. Then hiPSC-AMs were employed to establish the AF model by HS. Whole-cell patch clamp technique and calcium imaging were used to identify the AF model. The stability of 29 reference genes was evaluated using delta-Ct, GeNorm, NormFinder, and BestKeeper algorithms;ResultsHiPSC-AMs displayed atrial myocyte action potentials and expressed the atrial-specific protein MLC-2 A and NR2F2, about 70% of the cardiomyocytes were MLC-2 A positive. After HS, hiPSC-AMs showed a significant increase in beating frequency, a shortened action potential duration, and increased calcium transient frequency. Of the 29 candidate genes, the top five most stably ranked genes were ABL1, RPL37A, POP4, RPL30, and EIF2B1. After normalization using ABL1, KCNJ2 was significantly upregulated in the AF model; Conclusions: In the hiPSC-AMs AF model established by HS, ABL1 provides greater normalization efficiency than commonly used GAPDH.
BackgroundThe genus Amorphophallus (Araceae) contains approximately 250 species, most of which have high ecological and economic significance. The chloroplast genome data and the comprehensive analysis of the chloroplast genome structure of Amorphophallus is limited. In this study, four chloroplast genomes of Amorphophallus were sequenced and assembled. For the first time, comparative analyses of chloroplast genomes were conducted on the 13 Amorphophallus species in conjunction with nine published sequences.ResultsThe Amorphophallus chloroplast genomes exhibited typical quadripartite structures with lengths ranging from 164,417 to 177,076 bp. These structures consisted of a large single copy (LSC, 90,705 - 98,561 bp), a small single copy (SSC, 14,172 - 21,575 bp), and a pair of inverted repeats (IRs, 26,225 - 35,204 bp). The genomes contain 108 - 113 unique genes, including 76 - 79 protein-coding genes, 28 - 29 tRNA genes, and 4 rRNA genes. The molecular structure, gene order, content, codon usage, long repeats, and simple sequence repeats (SSRs) within Amorphophallus were generally conserved. However, several variations in intron loss and gene expansion on the IR-SSC boundary regions were found among these 13 genomes. Four mutational hotspot regions, including trnM-atpE, atpB, atpB-rbcL and ycf1 were identified. They could identify and phylogeny future species in the genus Amorphophallus. Positive selection was found for rpl36, ccsA, rpl16, rps4, rps8, rps11, rps12, rps14, clpP, rps3, ycf1, rpl20, rps2, rps18, rps19, atpA, atpF, rpl14, rpoA, rpoC1, rpoC2 and rps15 based on the analyses of Ka/Ks ratios. Phylogenetic inferences based on the complete chloroplast genomes revealed a sister relationship between Amorphophallus and Caladieae. All Amorphophallus species formed a monophyletic evolutionary clade and were divided into three groups, including CA-II, SEA, and CA-I. Amorphophallus albus, A. krausei, A. kachinensis and A. konjac were clustered into the CA-II clade, A. paeoniifolius and A. titanum were clustered into the SEA clade, A. muelleri 'zhuyajin1', Amorphophallus sp, A. coaetaneus, A. tonkinensis and A. yunnanensis were clustered into CA- I clade.ConclusionsThe genome structure and gene content of Amorphophallus chloroplast genomes are consistent across various species. In this study, the structural variation and comparative genome of chloroplast genomes of Amorphophallus were comprehensively analyzed for the first time. The results provide important genetic information for species classification, identification, molecular breeding, and evolutionary exploration of the genus Amorphophallus.
Background The carbon metabolism pathway is of paramount importance for the growth and development of plants, exerting a pivotal regulatory role in stress responses. The exacerbation of drought impacts on the plant carbon cycle due to global warming necessitates comprehensive investigation into the response mechanisms of Masson Pine (Pinus massoniana Lamb.), an exemplary pioneer drought-tolerant tree, thereby establishing a foundation for predicting future forest ecosystem responses to climate change. Results The seedlings of Masson Pine were utilized as experimental materials in this study, and the transcriptome, metabolome, and photosynthesis were assessed under varying temperatures and drought intensities. The findings demonstrated that the impact of high temperature and drought on the photosynthetic rate and transpiration rate of Masson Pine seedlings was more pronounced compared to individual stressors. The analysis of transcriptome data revealed that the carbon metabolic pathways of Masson Pine seedlings were significantly influenced by high temperature and drought co-stress, with a particular impact on genes involved in starch and sucrose metabolism. The metabolome analysis revealed that only trehalose and Galactose 1-phosphate were specifically associated with the starch and sucrose metabolic pathways. Furthermore, the trehalose metabolic heat map was constructed by integrating metabolome and transcriptome data, revealing a significant increase in trehalose levels across all three comparison groups. Additionally, the PmTPS1, PmTPS5, and PmTPPD genes were identified as key regulatory genes governing trehalose accumulation. Conclusions The combined effects of high temperature and drought on photosynthetic rate, transpiration rate, transcriptome, and metabolome were more pronounced than those induced by either high temperature or drought alone. Starch and sucrose metabolism emerged as the pivotal carbon metabolic pathways in response to high temperature and drought stress in Masson pine. Trehalose along with PmTPS1, PmTPS5, and PmTPPD genes played crucial roles as metabolites and key regulators within the starch and sucrose metabolism.
BackgroundSpecific pathogen-free ducks are a valuable laboratory resource for waterfowl disease research and poultry vaccine development. High throughput sequencing allows the systematic identification of structural variants in genomes. Copy number variation (CNV) can explain the variation of important duck genetic traits. Herein, the genome-wide CNVs of the three experimental duck species in China (Jinding ducks (JD), Shaoxing ducks (SX), and Fujian Shanma ducks (SM)) were characterized using resequencing to determine their genetic characteristics and selection signatures.ResultsWe obtained 4,810 CNV regions (CNVRs) by merging 73,012 CNVs, covering 4.2% of the duck genome. Functional analysis revealed that the shared CNVR-harbored genes were significantly enriched for 31 gene ontology terms and 16 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways (e.g., olfactory transduction and immune system). Based on the genome-wide fixation index for each CNVR, growth (SPAG17 and PTH1R), disease resistance (CATHL3 and DMBT1), and thermoregulation (TRPC4 and SLIT3) candidate genes were identified in strongly selected signatures specific to JD, SM, and SX, respectively.ConclusionsIn conclusion, we investigated the genome-wide distribution of experimental duck CNVs, providing a reference to establish the genetic basis of different phenotypic traits, thus contributing to the management of experimental animal genetic resources.
BackgroundCashmere, named as "soft gold", derives from the secondary hair follicles (SHFs) of cashmere goat which is vital to Northwest China's economy. The cytodifferentiation stage (E120), mirroring the complete hair follicle (HF) structure of adult goats and marking a critical phase in SHF development. Therefore, this study aims to enhance the understanding of SHF development and its impact on fiber quality, informing breeding strategies.ResultsFrom the scRNA-seq data analysis, the intricate processes and transcriptional dynamics of inner layer cell differentiation of HFs were unveiled in this study. we identified nine cell populations during cytodifferentiation and key structures such as the hair shaft and inner root sheath. And we discovered three main inner layer lineages and seven subpopulations, clarifying their roles in specialization and signaling. Pseudotime mapping analysis showed cell evolution from early stage to mature stages marked by unique gene expressions, and the intermediate stage on the differentiation of each lineage was revealed. The identification and spatial localization of specific transcription factors, such as GATA3, LEF1 and PRDM1, as well as keratin genes highlight regulatory pathways involved in HF development, which was further validated by immunofluorescence. These findings suggested the potential strategies to improve fiber quality, and the discovery of diverse cell types and their developmental molecular mechanisms, particularly in this species-specific context, offered a nuanced view of the regulatory mechanisms driving HF development in cashmere goats.ConclusionOverall, these findings provide a systematic molecular atlas of skin, defining three major branches and cell states of inner layer cells of HF, and determining how the branch-specific transcription factors, keratins, and signals coordinate HF morphogenesis during cytodifferentiation stage. This research not only advances skin tissue research in goats but also holds broader implications for the understanding of HF regeneration and development across various species.
Background Exploring the physiological and molecular mechanisms underlying goat sexual maturation can enhance breeding practices and optimize reproductive efficiency and is therefore substantially important for practical breeding purposes. As an essential neuroendocrine organ in animals, the hypothalamus is involved in sexual development and other reproductive processes in female animals. Although microRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified as significant regulators of goat reproduction, there is a lack of research on the molecular regulatory mechanisms of hypothalamic miRNAs that are involved in the sexual development of goats. Therefore, we examined the dynamic changes in serum hormone profiles and hypothalamic miRNA expression profiles at four developmental stages (1 day (neonatal, D1, n = 5), 2 months (prepubertal, M2, n = 5), 4 months (sexual maturity, M4, n = 5), and 6 months (breeding period, M6, n = 5)) during sexual development in Jining grey goats. Results Transcriptome analysis revealed 95 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs) in the hypothalamus of goats across the four developmental stages. The target genes of these miRNAs were significantly enriched in the GnRH signalling pathway, the PI3K-Akt signalling pathway, and the Ras signalling pathway (P < 0.05). Additionally, 16 DEMs are common among the M2 vs. D1, M4 vs. D1, and M6 vs. D1 comparisons, indicating that the transition from D1 to M2 represents a potentially critical period for sexual development in Jining grey goats. The bioinformatics analysis results indicate that miR-193a/miR-193b-3p-Annexin A7 (ANXA7), miR-324-5p-Adhesion G protein-coupled receptor A1 (ADGRA1), miR-324-3p-Erbb2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2), and miR-324-3p-Rap guanine nucleotide exchange factor 3 (RAPGEF3) are potentially involved in biological processes such as hormone secretion, energy metabolism, and signal transduction. In addition, we further confirmed that miR-324-3p targets the regulatory gene RAPGEF3. Conclusion These results further enrich the expression profile of hypothalamic miRNAs in goats and provide important insights for studying the regulatory effects of hypothalamic miRNAs on the sexual development of goats after birth.
Mammary epithelial cells, the only milk-producing cell type in the mammary gland, undergo dynamic proliferation and differentiation during pregnancy, culminating in lactation postpartum. The East FriEsian sheep ranks among the world's most prolific dairy breeds, while the Sewa sheep, a unique dual-purpose breed autochthonous to the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, exhibits significantly lower milk production. Employing tissue culture methods, we successfully established mammary epithelial cell lines from both breeds. Morphological assessment of mammary epithelial cells and immunofluorescence identification of Cytokeratin 7 and Cytokeratin 8 confirmed the epithelial identity of the isolated cells. Subsequent RNA-seq analysis of these in vitro epithelial cell lines revealed 1813 differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Among these, 1108 were significantly up-regulated and 705 were down-regulated in Sewa epithelial sheep cells compared to East FriEsian epithelial cells. KEGG enrichment analysis identified cellular processes, environmental information processing, human diseases, metabolism, and organismal systems as the primary functional categories associated with DEGs. Gene ontology (GO) terms annotation, categorized into molecular function, biological processes, and cellular component, yielded "binding and catalytic activity," "molecular function regulator activity," and "cellular process," "biological regulation," and "regulation of biological process" as the top three terms within each domain, respectively. Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (KOG) classification further revealed that "signal transduction mechanisms" accounted for the largest proportion of DEGs among all KOG categories. Finally, based on these analyses, ATF3 and MPP7 were identified as promising candidate genes for regulating lactation.
Background Accurately deciphering clonal copy number substructure can provide insights into the evolutionary mechanism of cancer, and clustering single-cell copy number profiles has become an effective means to unmask intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH). However, copy numbers inferred from single-cell DNA sequencing (scDNA-seq) data are error-prone due to technically confounding factors such as amplification bias and allele-dropout, and this makes it difficult to precisely identify the ITH.Results We introduce a hybrid model called scGAL to infer clonal copy number substructure. It combines an autoencoder with a generative adversarial network to jointly analyze independent single-cell copy number profiles and gene expression data from same cell line. Under an adversarial learning framework, scGAL exploits complementary information from gene expression data to relieve the effects of noise in copy number data, and learns latent representations of scDNA-seq cells for accurate inference of the ITH. Evaluation results on three real cancer datasets suggest scGAL is able to accurately infer clonal architecture and surpasses other similar methods. In addition, assessment of scGAL on various simulated datasets demonstrates its high robustness against the changes of data size and distribution. scGAL can be accessed at: https://github.com/zhyu-lab/scgal.Conclusions Joint analysis of independent single-cell copy number and gene expression data from a same cell line can effectively exploit complementary information from individual omics, and thus gives more refined indication of clonal copy number substructure.
BackgroundSpermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are the foundation cells for continual spermatogenesis and germline regeneration in mammals. SSC activities reside in the undifferentiated spermatogonial population, and currently, the molecular identities of SSCs and their committed progenitors remain unclear.ResultsWe performed single-cell transcriptome analysis on isolated undifferentiated spermatogonia from mice to decipher the molecular signatures of SSC fate transitions. Through comprehensive analysis, we delineated the developmental trajectory and identified candidate transcription factors (TFs) involved in the fate transitions of SSCs and their progenitors in distinct states. Specifically, we characterized the Asingle spermatogonial subtype marked by the expression of Eomes. Eomes+ cells contained enriched transplantable SSCs, and more than 90% of the cells remained in the quiescent state. Conditional deletion of Eomes in the germline did not impact steady-state spermatogenesis but enhanced SSC regeneration. Forced expression of Eomes in spermatogenic cells disrupted spermatogenesis mainly by affecting the cell cycle progression of undifferentiated spermatogonia. After injury, Eomes+ cells re-enter the cell cycle and divide to expand the SSC pool. Eomes+ cells consisted of 7 different subsets of cells at single-cell resolution, and genes enriched in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and the PI3/Akt signaling pathway participated in the SSC regeneration process.ConclusionsIn this study, we explored the molecular characteristics and critical regulators of subpopulations of undifferentiated spermatogonia. The findings of the present study described a quiescent SSC subpopulation, Eomes+ spermatogonia, and provided a dynamic transcriptional map of SSC fate determination.
MicroRNA (miRNA) is a type of endogenous non-coding small RNA, which is abundant in living organisms. miRNAs play an important role in regulating gene expression and myriad cellular processes by binding to target messenger RNAs through complementary base pairing, and cross-species regulation mammalian cells by plant-derived xeno-miRNAs has been described. Here, we examined the miRNA species in two alfalfa (Medicago sativa, lucerne) cultivars commonly grown in Ningxia, China: cv. Zhongmu 1 and cv. Xinyan 52. Both cultivars have good salt and drought resistance. We found that the miRNA profiles were similar between the cultivars, with a slightly higher number of miRNAs present in the newer cv. Xinyan 52, which may contribute to its improved salt and drought tolerance. miRNAs were stable during drying, and some miRNAs were increased in dry versus fresh alfalfa, suggesting some miRNAs may be upregulated during drying. Alfalfa-derived miRNAs could be detected in exosomes from serum and whey collected from dairy cows, confirming the ability of the exogenous miRNAs (xeno-miRNAs) to enter the circulation and reach the mammary epithelium. In vitro studies confirmed that overexpression of mtr-miR156a could downregulate expression of Phosphatase 2 Regulatory Subunit B'gamma ( PPP2R5D) and Phosphoinositide-3-kinase Regulatory Subunit 2 (PIK3R2). Overexpression of mtr-miR156a also modulated PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling as well as the casein content of milk produced by bovine mammary epithelial cells. Based on the known roles of PPP2R5D and PIK3R2 in regulating the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway as well as the effect of PI3K-AKT-mTOR on milk protein content, our findings implicate alfalfa-derived miR156a as a new cross-species regulator of milk quality in dairy cows.
BackgroundThe body conformation traits of dairy cattle are closely related to their production performance and health. The present study aimed to identify gene variants associated with body conformation traits in Chinese Holstein cattle and provide marker loci for genomic selection in dairy cattle breeding. These findings could offer robust theoretical support for optimizing the health of dairy cattle and enhancing their production performance. ResultsThis study involved 586 Chinese Holstein cattle and used the predicted transmitting abilities (PTAs) of 17 body conformation traits evaluated by the Council on Dairy Cattle Breeding in the USA as phenotypic values. These traits were categorized into body size traits, rump traits, feet/legs traits, udder traits, and dairy characteristic traits. On the basis of the genomic profiling results from the Genomic Profiler Bovine 100 K SNP chip, genotype data were quality controlled via PLINK software, and 586 individuals and 80,713 SNPs were retained for further analysis. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) were conducted via GEMMA software, which employs both univariate linear mixed models (LMMs) and multivariate linear mixed models (mvLMMs). The Bonferroni method was used to determine the significance threshold, identifying gene variants significantly associated with body conformation traits in Chinese Holstein cattle. The single-trait GWAS identified 24 SNPs significantly associated with body conformation traits (P < 0.01), with annotation leading to the identification of 21 candidate genes. The multi-trait GWAS identified 54 SNPs, which were annotated to 57 candidate genes, including 39 new SNPs not identified in the single-trait GWAS. Additionally, 14 SNPs in the 86.84-87.41 Mb region of chromosome 6 were significantly associated with multiple traits, such as body size, udder, and dairy characteristics. Four genes-SLC4A4, GC, NPFFR2, and ADAMTS3-were annotated in this region. ConclusionsA total of 63 SNPs were identified as significantly associated with 17 body conformation traits in Chinese Holstein cattle through both single-trait and multi-trait GWAS analyses. Sixty-six candidate genes were annotated, with 12 genes identified by both methods, such as SLC4A4, GC, NPFFR2, and ADAMTS3, which are involved in pathways such as growth hormone synthesis and secretion, sphingolipid signaling, and dopaminergic synapse pathways. These findings provide potential genetic marker information related to body conformation traits for the breeding of Chinese Holstein cattle.
Background B-box (BBX) family is a class of zinc finger transcription factors (TFs) that play essential roles in regulating plant growth, development, as well as abiotic stress. However, no systematic analysis of BBX genes has yet been conducted in alfalfa (Medica go sativa L.), and their functions have not been elucidated up to now. Results In this study, 28 MsBBX genes were identified from the alfalfa genome, which were clustered into 4 subfamilies according to an evolutionary tree of BBX proteins. Exon-intron structure and conserved motif analysis reflected the evolutionary conservation of MsBBXs in alfalfa. Collinearity analysis showed that segmental duplication promoted the expansion of the MsBBX family. Analysis of cis-regulatory elements suggested that the MsBBX genes possessed many growth/development-, light-, phytohormone-, and abiotic stress-related elements. MsBBX genes were differentially expressed in leaves, flowers, pre-elongated stems, elongated stems, roots and nodules, and most MsBBXs were remarkably induced by drought, salt and various plant growth regulators (ABA, JA, and SA). Further functional verification demonstrated that overexpressing of the MsBBX11 gene clearly promoted salt tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis by regulating growth and physiological processes of seedlings. Conclusions This research provides insights into further functional research and regulatory mechanisms of MsBBX family genes under abiotic stress of alfalfa.
Background Skeletal muscle development plays a crucial role in yield and quality of pork; however, this process is influenced by various factors. In this study, we employed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) and transcriptome sequencing to comprehensively investigate the longissimus dorsi muscle (LDM), aiming to identify key genes that impact the growth and development of Duroc pigs with different average daily gains (ADGs). Results Eight pigs were selected and divided into two groups based on ADGs: H (774.89 g) group and L (658.77 g) group. Each pair of the H and L groups were half-siblings. The results of methylation sequencing revealed 2631 differentially methylated genes (DMGs) involved in metabolic processes, signalling, insulin secretion, and other biological activities. Furthermore, a joint analysis was conducted on these DMGs and the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) obtained from transcriptome sequencing of the same individual. This analysis identified 316 differentially methylated and differentially expressed genes (DMEGs), including 18 DMEGs in promoter regions and 294 DMEGs in gene body regions. Finally, LPAR1 and MEF2C were selected as candidate genes associated with muscle development. Bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP) and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) revealed that the promoter region of LPAR1 exhibited significantly lower methylation levels (P < 0.05) and greater expression levels (P < 0.05) in the H group than in the L group. Additionally, hypermethylation was observed in the gene body region of MEF2C, as was a low expression level, in the H group (P < 0.05). Conclusions These results suggest that the differences in the ADGs of Duroc pigs fed the same diet may be influenced by the methylation levels and expression levels of genes related to skeletal muscle development.
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play crucial roles in numerous biological processes and are involved in complex human diseases through interactions with proteins. Accurate identification of lncRNA-protein interactions (LPI) can help elucidate the functional mechanisms of lncRNAs and provide scientific insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying related diseases. While many sequence-based methods have been developed to predict LPIs, efficiently extracting and effectively integrating potential feature information that reflects functional attributes from lncRNA and protein sequences remains a significant challenge. This paper proposes a Dinucleotide-Codon Fusion Feature encoding (DNCFF) and constructs an LPI prediction model based on deep learning, termed LPI-DNCFF. The Dual Nucleotide Visual Fusion Feature encoding (DNVFF) incorporates positional information of single nucleotides with subsequent nucleotide connections, while Codon Fusion Feature encoding (CFF) considers the specificity, molecular weight, and physicochemical properties of each amino acid. These encoding methods encapsulate rich and intuitive sequence information in limited encoding dimensions. The model comprehensively predicts LPIs by integrating global, local, and structural features, and inputs them into BiLSTM and attention layers to form a hybrid deep learning model. Experimental results demonstrate that LPI-DNCFF effectively predicts LPIs. The BiLSTM layer and attention mechanism can learn long-term dependencies and identify weighted key features, enhancing model performance. Compared to one-hot encoding, DNCFF more efficiently and thoroughly extracts potential sequence features. Compared to other existing methods, LPI-DNCFF achieved the best performance on the RPI1847 and ATH948 datasets, with MCC values of approximately 97.84% and 84.58%, respectively, outperforming the state-of-the-art method by about 1.44% and 3.48%.
Background The dirigent (DIR) genes encode proteins that act as crucial regulators of plant lignin biosynthesis. In Solanaceae species, members of the DIR gene family are intricately related to plant growth and development, playing a key role in responding to various biotic and abiotic stresses. It will be of great application significance to analyze the DIR gene family and expression profile under various pathogen stresses in Solanaceae species. Results A total of 57 tobacco NtDIRs and 33 potato StDIRs were identified based on their respective genome sequences. Phylogenetic analysis of DIR genes in tobacco, potato, eggplant and Arabidopsis thaliana revealed three distinct subgroups (DIR-a, DIR-b/d and DIR-e). Gene structure and conserved motif analysis showed that a high degree of conservation in both exon/intron organization and protein motifs among tobacco and potato DIR genes, especially within members of the same subfamily. Total 8 pairs of tandem duplication genes (3 pairs in tobacco, 5 pairs in potato) and 13 pairs of segmental duplication genes (6 pairs in tobacco, 7 pairs in potato) were identified based on the analysis of gene duplication events. Cis-regulatory elements of the DIR promoters participated in hormone response, stress responses, circadian control, endosperm expression, and meristem expression. Transcriptomic data analysis under biotic stress revealed diverse response patterns among DIR gene family members to pathogens, indicating their functional divergence. After 96 h post-inoculation with Ralstonia solanacearum L. (Ras), tobacco seedlings exhibited typical symptoms of tobacco bacterial wilt. The qRT-PCR analysis of 11 selected NtDIR genes displayed differential expression pattern in response to the bacterial pathogen Ras infection. Using line 392278 of potato as material, typical symptoms of potato late blight manifested on the seedling leaves under Phytophthora infestans infection. The qRT-PCR analysis of 5 selected StDIR genes showed up-regulation in response to pathogen infection. Notably, three clustered genes (NtDIR2, NtDIR4, StDIR3) exhibited a robust response to pathogen infection, highlighting their essential roles in disease resistance. Conclusion The genome-wide identification, evolutionary analysis, and expression profiling of DIR genes in response to various pathogen infection in tobacco and potato have provided valuable insights into the roles of these genes under various stress conditions. Our results could provide a basis for further functional analysis of the DIR gene family under pathogen infection conditions.
BackgroundIn recent years, the use of endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) has become increasingly common, leading to severe environmental pollution and harm to aquatic organisms. 17 alpha-Methyltestosterone (MT) is a synthetic androgen that can cause immunotoxicity in aquaculture, affecting fish health. To address this issue, this study aimed to investigate the effect of Vitamin C (VC) on MT-induced immunotoxicity and determine the optimal VC supplementation.ResultsCarassius auratus was exposed to 50 ng/L MT and treated with 25, 50, and 150 mg/kg VC for 7, 14, and 21 d. Morphological indicators, histological characteristics, hepatic antioxidant capacity, and immune-related gene expression were analyzed. Additionally, RNA-seq was performed on the liver tissues of the control, MT, and MT + 25 mg/kg VC groups after 21 d. Results showed that, MT treatment significantly increased liver malondialdehyde content and inhibited immune-related gene expression (TNF-alpha, IL-8, INF-gamma, IL-10, Caspase-9, and IGF-I), causing oxidative stress and immunotoxicity, leading to hepatic steatosis. However, supplementation with 25-50 mg/kg VC effectively alleviated the MT-induced damage to the hepatic structure and immune system. RNA-seq revealed significant enrichment of differentially expressed genes in multiple signaling pathways, including the mTOR, MAPK, and Wnt pathways.ConclusionsIn summary, 25-50 mg/kg VC alleviated inhibitory effect of MT on immune-related genes in C. auratus liver, reducing MT-induced tissue damage. VC not only alleviated inflammation, oxidative stress, and immunotoxicity induced by MT through the regulation of the mTOR, MAPK, and Wnt signaling pathways, but also indirectly enhanced cellular antioxidant defense mechanisms by regulating the NRF2 pathway. This provides a theoretical basis for VC application in aquaculture, improving fish health and increasing efficiency.
BackgroundOvarian cancer (OC) has the worst prognosis among gynecological malignancies, most of which are found to be in advanced stage. Cell reduction surgery based on platinum-based chemotherapy is the current standard of treatment for OC, but patients are prone to relapse and develop drug resistance. The objective of this study was to identify a specific molecular target responsible for platinum chemotherapy resistance in OC.ResultsWe screened the protein-coding gene Caldesmon (CALD1), expressed in cisplatin-resistant OC cells in vitro. The prognostic value of CALD1 was evaluated using survival curve analysis in OC patients treated with platinum therapy. The diagnostic value of CALD1 was verified by drawing a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve using clinical samples from OC patients. This study analyzed data from various databases including Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), Human Protein Atlas (HPA), The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE), The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), GEPIA 2, UALCAN, Kaplan-Meier (KM) plotter, LinkedOmics database, and String. Different expression genes (DEGs) between cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-resistant cells were acquired respectively from 5 different datasets of GEO. CALD1 was selected as a common gene from 5 groups DEGs. Online data analysis of HPA and CCLE showed that CALD1 was highly expressed in both normal ovarian tissue and OC. In TCGA database, high expression of CALD1 was associated with disease stage and venous invasion in OC. Patients with high CALD1 expression levels had a worse prognosis under platinum drug intervention, according to Kaplan-Meier (KM) plotter analysis. Analysis of clinical sample data from GEO showed that CALD1 had superior diagnostic value in distinguishing patients with platinum "resistant" and platinum "sensitive" (AUC = 0.816), as well as patients with worse progression-free survival (AUC = 0.741), and those with primary and omental metastases (AUC = 0.811) in ovarian tumor. At last, CYR61 was identified as a potential predictive molecule that may play an important role alongside CALD1 in the development of platinum resistance in OC.ConclusionsCALD1, as a member of cytoskeletal protein, was associated with poor prognosis of platinum resistance in OC, and could be used as a target protein for mechanism study of platinum resistance in OC.
Motivation The rational modelling of the relationship among drugs, targets and diseases is crucial for drug retargeting. While significant progress has been made in studying binary relationships, further research is needed to deepen our understanding of ternary relationships. The application of graph neural networks in drug retargeting is increasing, but further research is needed to determine the appropriate modelling method for ternary relationships and how to capture their complex multi-feature structure.Results The aim of this study was to construct relationships among drug, targets and diseases. To represent the complex relationships among these entities, we used a heterogeneous graph structure. Additionally, we propose a DTD-GNN model that combines graph convolutional networks and graph attention networks to learn feature representations and association information, facilitating a more thorough exploration of the relationships. The experimental results demonstrate that the DTD-GNN model outperforms other graph neural network models in terms of AUC, Precision, and F1-score. The study has important implications for gaining a comprehensive understanding of the relationships between drugs and diseases, as well as for further research and application in exploring the mechanisms of drug-disease interactions. The study reveals these relationships, providing possibilities for innovative therapeutic strategies in medicine.
BackgroundColorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the world's most common malignancies. Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in characteristics beyond the DNA sequence. Epigenetic information is essential for maintaining specific expression patterns of genes and the normal development of individuals, and disorders of epigenetic modifications may alter the expression of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes and affect the development of cancer. This study elucidates the relationship between epigenetics and the prognosis of CRC patients by developing a predictive model to explore the potential value of epigenetics in the treatment of CRC.MethodsGene expression data of CRC patients' tumor tissue and controls were downloaded from GEO database. Combined with the 720 epigenetic-related genes (ERGs) downloaded from EpiFactors database, prognosis-related epigenetic genes were selected by univariate cox and LASSO analyses. The Kaplan-Meier and ROC curve were used to analyze the accuracy of the model. Data of 238 CRC samples with survival data downloaded from the GSE17538 were used for validation. Finally, the risk model is combined with the clinical characteristics of CRC patients to perform univariate and multivariate cox regression analysis to obtain independent risk factors and draw nomogram. Then we evaluated the accuracy of its prediction by calibration curves.ResultsA total of 2906 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between CRC and control samples. After overlapping DEGs with 720 ERGs, 56 epigenetic-related DEGs (DEERGs) were identified. Combining univariate and LASSO regression analysis, the 8 epigenetic-related genes-based risk score model of CRC was established. The ROC curves and survival difference of high and low risk groups revealed the good performance of the risk score model based on prognostic biomarkers in both training and validation sets. A nomogram with good performance to predict the survival of CRC patients were established based on age, NM stage and risk score. The calibration curves showed that the prognostic model had good predictive performance.ConclusionIn this study, an epigenetically relevant 8-gene signature was constructed that can effectively predict the prognosis of CRC patients and provide potential directions for targeted therapies for CRC.
BackgroundAs two of the most impactful abiotic stresses, salt and drought strongly affect tomato growth and development, especially at the seedling stage. However, dissection of the genetic basis underlying salt/drought tolerance at seedling stage in tomato remains limited in scope.ResultsHere, we reported an analysis of major quantitative trait locus (QTL) and potential causal genetic variations in seedling stage salt/drought tolerance in recombinant inbred lines (n = 201) of S. pimpinellifolium and S. lycopersicum parents by whole genome resequencing. A total of 5 QTLs on chromosome 1, 3, 5, 7 and 12 for salt tolerance (ST) and 15 QTLs on chromosome 1, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 12 for drought tolerance (DT) were identified by linkage mapping. The proportion of phenotypic variation explained (PVE%) by these QTLs ranged from 4.91 to 15.86. Two major QTLs qST7 and qDT1-3 were detected in both two years, for which two candidate genes (methionine sulfoxide reductase SlMSRB1 and brassinosteroid insensitive 1-like receptor SlBRL1) and the potential functional variations were further analyzed. Taking advantage of the tomato population resequencing data, the frequency changes of the potential favorable QTL allele for seedling stage ST/DT during tomato breeding were explored.ConclusionsThese results will be beneficial for the exploration of salt/drought tolerance genes at seedling stages, laying a foundation for marker-assisted breeding for seedling stage salt/drought tolerance.
Background Hygienic behavior, a specialized form of immune response evolved in social insects, plays a crucial role in safeguarding colonies from disease spread. In honeybee colonies, such behavior typically entails the dual steps of uncapping and removal of unhealthy and deceased brood. Although in recent years, numerous studies have examined the development of hygienic behavior, the mechanisms underlying the division in the performance of uncapping and removal have yet to be sufficiently elucidated. In this regard, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been evidenced to be engaged in regulating the physiological activities of honeybees; however, whether lncRNAs are likewise involved in the uncapping and removal tasks has not been clarified. Results In this study, the strong hygienic Apis cerana worker bees were used and the processes of uncapping and removal behaviors in three colonies were assayed with freeze-killed brood in the field. We then sequenced the antennal RNAs of honeybees to identify differentially expressed lncRNAs and performed lncRNA-mRNA association analysis to establish the differences between uncapping and removal. We detected 1,323 differentially expressed lncRNAs in the antennae, and the findings of lncRNA-mRNA association analyses revealed that the target genes of differentially expressed lncRNAs between uncapping and removal worker bees were predominantly linked to response to stimulus, receptor activity, and synapse. Notably, among the lncRNAs enriched in cellular response to stimulus, XR_001766094.2 was exclusively expressed in the uncapping worker bees. Based on these findings, we hypothesize that XR_001766094.2 plays a key role in distinguishing uncapping from removal behaviors by responding to external stimulus, thereby suggesting that the division of hygienic behaviors is governed by differential thresholds of responsiveness to environmental cues. Conclusion We characterized differences in the uncapping and removal behaviors of worker bees from a perspective of lncRNAs. Uncapping bees may be equipped with a more rapid stimulatory response and more acute olfactory sensitivity, contributing to the rapid hygienic behavior in honeybee colonies. Our results thus establish a foundation for potential lncRNA-mediated gene expression regulation in hygienic behavior.
Background Pigeon circovirus infections in pigeons (Columba livia domestica) have been reported worldwide. Pigeons should be PiCV-free when utilized as qualified experimental animals. However, pigeons can be freely purchased as experimental animals without any clear guidelines to follow. Herein, we investigated the status quo of PiCV infections on a pigeon farm in Beijing, China, which provides pigeons for experimental use.Results PiCV infection was verified in at least three types of tissues in all forty pigeons tested. A total of 29 full-length genomes were obtained and deposited in GenBank. The whole genome sequence comparison among the 29 identified PiCV strains revealed nucleotide homologies of 85.8-100%, and these sequences exhibited nucleotide homologies of 82.7-98.9% as compared with those of the reference sequences. The cap gene displayed genetic diversity, with a wide range of amino acid homologies ranging from 64.5% to 100%. Phylogenetic analysis of the 29 full-genome sequences revealed that the PiCV strains in this study could be further divided into four clades: A (17.2%), B (10.4%), C (37.9%) and D (34.5%). Thirteen recombination events were also detected in 18 out of the 29 PiCV genomes obtained in this study. Phylogenetic research using the rep and cap genes verified the recombination events, which occurred between clades A/F, A/B, C/D, and B/D among the 18 PiCV strains studied.Conclusions In conclusion, PiCV infection, which is highly genetically varied, is extremely widespread on pigeon farms in Beijing. These findings indicate that if pigeons are to be used as experimental animals, it is necessary to evaluate the impact of PiCV infection on the results.
BackgroundThe breeding of layers emphasizes the continual selection of egg-related traits, such as egg production, egg quality and eggshell, which enhance their productivity and meet the demand of market. As the breeding process continued, the genomic homozygosity of layers gradually increased, resulting in the emergence of runs of homozygosity (ROH). Therefore, ROH analysis can be used in conjunction with other methods to detect selection signatures and identify candidate genes associated with various important traits in layer breeding.ResultsIn this study, we generated whole-genome sequencing data from 686 hens in a Rhode Island Red population that had undergone fifteen consecutive generations of intensive artificial selection. We performed a genome-wide ROH analysis and utilized multiple methods to detect signatures of selection. A total of 141,720 ROH segments were discovered in whole population, and most of them (97.35%) were less than 3 Mb in length. Twenty-three ROH islands were identified, and they overlapped with some regions bearing selection signatures, which were detected by the De-correlated composite of multiple signals methods (DCMS). Sixty genes were discovered and functional annotation analysis revealed the possible roles of them in growth, development, immunity and signaling in layers. Additionally, two-tailed analyses including DCMS and ROH for 44 phenotypes of layers were conducted to find out the genomic differences between subgroups of top and bottom 10% phenotype of individuals. Combining the results of GWAS, we observed that regions significantly associated with traits also exhibited selection signatures between the high and low subgroups. We identified a region significantly associated with egg weight near the 25 Mb region of GGA 1, which exhibited selection signatures and has higher genomic homozygosity in the low egg weight subpopulation. This suggests that the region may be play a role in the decline in egg weight.ConclusionsIn summary, through the combined analysis of ROH, selection signatures, and GWAS, we identified several genomic regions that associated with the production traits of layers, providing reference for the study of layer genome.
The Sox gene family, a collection of transcription factors widely distributed throughout the animal kingdom, plays a crucial role in numerous developmental processes. Echinoderms occupy a pivotal position in many research fields, such as neuroscience, sex determination and differentiation, and embryonic development. However, to date, no comprehensive study has been conducted to characterize and analyze Sox genes in echinoderms. In the present study, the evolution and expression of Sox family genes across 11 echinoderms were analyzed using bioinformatics methods. The results revealed a total of 70 Sox genes, with counts ranging from 5 to 8 across different echinoderms. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the identified Sox genes could be categorized into seven distinct classes: the SoxB1 class, SoxB2 class, SoxC class, SoxD class, SoxE class, SoxF class and SoxH class. Notably, the SoxB1, SoxB2, and SoxF genes were ubiquitously present in all the echinoderms studied, which suggests that these genes may be conserved in echinoderms. The spatiotemporal expression patterns observed for Sox genes in the three echinoderms indicated that various Sox members perform distinct functional roles. Notably, SoxB1 is likely involved in echinoderm ovary development, while SoxH may play a crucial role in testis development in starfish and sea cucumber. In general, the present investigation provides a molecular foundation for exploring the Sox gene in echinoderms, providing a valuable resource for future phylogenetic and genomic studies.
BackgroundStudying the composition rules and evolution mechanisms of genome sequences are core issues in the post-genomic era, and k-mer spectrum analysis of genome sequences is an effective means to solve this problem.ResultWe divided total 8-mers of genome sequences into 16 kinds of XY-type due to XY dinucleotides number in 8-mers. Previous works explored that the independent unimodal distributions observed only in three CG-type 8-mer spectra, while non-CG type 8-mer spectra have not the universal phenomenon from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. On this basis, we analyzed the distribution variation of non-CG type 8-mer spectra across 889 animal genome sequences. Following the evolutionary order of animals from primitive to more complex, we found that the spectrum distributions gradually transition from unimodal to tri-modal. The relative distance from the average frequency of each non-CG type 8-mers to the center frequency is different within a species and among different species. For the 8-mers contain CG dinucleotides, we further divided these into 16 subsets, where each 8-mer contains both CG and XY dinucleotides, called XY1_CG1 subsets. We found that the separability values of XY1_CG1 spectra are closely related to the evolution and specificity of animals. Considering the constraint of Chargaff's second parity rule, we finally obtained 10 separability values as the feature set to characterize the evolution state of genome sequences. In order to verify the rationality of the feature set, we used 14 common classification algorithms to perform binary classification tests. The results showed that the accuracy (Acc) ranged between 98.70% and 83.88% among birds, other vertebrates and mammals.ConclusionWe proposed a credible feature set to characterizes the evolution state of genomes and obtained satisfied results by the feature set on large scale classification of animals.
Background Plant-specific TIFY proteins are widely found in terrestrial plants and play important roles in plant adversity responses. Although the genome of loquat at the chromosome level has been published, studies on the TIFY family in loquat are lacking. Therefore, the EjTIFY gene family was bioinformatically analyzed by constructing a phylogenetic tree, chromosomal localization, gene structure, and adversity expression profiling in this study. Results Twenty-six EjTIFY genes were identified and categorized into four subfamilies (ZML, JAZ, PPD, and TIFY) based on their structural domains. Twenty-four EjTIFY genes were irregularly distributed on 11 of the 17 chromosomes, and the remaining two genes were distributed in fragments. We identified 15 covariate TIFY gene pairs in the loquat genome, 13 of which were involved in large-scale interchromosomal segmental duplication events, and two of which were involved in tandem duplication events. Many abiotic stress cis-elements were widely present in the promoter region. Analysis of the Ka/Ks ratio showed that the paralogous homologs of the EjTIFY family were mainly subjected to purifying selection. Analysis of the RNA-seq data revealed that a total of five differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were expressed in the shoots under gibberellin treatment, whereas only one gene was significantly differentially expressed in the leaves; under both low-temperature and high-temperature stresses, there were significantly differentially expressed genes, and the EjJAZ15 gene was significantly upregulated under both low- and high-temperature stress. RNA-seq and qRT-PCR expression analysis under salt stress conditions revealed that EjJAZ2, EjJAZ4, and EjJAZ9 responded to salt stress in loquat plants, which promoted resistance to salt stress through the JA pathway. The response model of the TIFY genes in the jasmonic acid pathway under salt stress in loquat was systematically summarized. Conclusions These results provide a theoretical basis for exploring the characteristics and functions of additional EjTIFY genes in the future. This study also provides a theoretical basis for further research on breeding for salt stress resistance in loquat. RT-qPCR analysis revealed that the expression of one of the three EjTIFY genes increased and the expression of two decreased under salt stress conditions, suggesting that EjTIFY exhibited different expression patterns under salt stress conditions.
BackgroundThe majority of bat species have developed remarkable echolocation ability, especially for the laryngeally echolocating bats along with high-frequency hearing. Adaptive evolution has been widely detected for the cochleae in the laryngeally echolocating bats, however, limited understanding for the brain which is the central to echolocation signal processing in the auditory perception system, the laryngeally echolocating bats brain may also undergo adaptive changes.ResultIn order to uncover the molecular adaptations related with high-frequency hearing in the brain of laryngeally echolocating bats, the genes expressed in the brain of Rhinolophus ferrumequinum (CF bat) and Myotis pilosus (FM bat) were both detected and also compared. A total of 346,891 genes were detected and the signal transduction mechanisms were annotated by the most abundant genes, followed by the transcription. In hence, there were 3,088 DEGs were found between the two bat brains, with 1,426 highly expressed in the brain of R. ferrumequinum, which were significantly enriched in the neuron and neurodevelopmental processes. Moreover, we found a key candidate hearing gene, ADCY1, playing an important role in the R. ferrumequinum brain and undergoing adaptive evolution in CF bats.ConclusionsOur study provides a new insight to the molecular bases of high-frequency hearing in two laryngeally echolocating bats brain and revealed different nervous system activities during auditory perception in the brain of CF bats.
Sugar Will Eventually be Exported Transporter (SWEET) proteins are highly conserved in various organisms and play crucial roles in sugar transport processes. However, SWEET proteins in peanuts, an essential leguminous crop worldwide, remain lacking in systematic characterization. Here, we identified 94 SWEET genes encoding the conservative MtN3/saliva domains in three peanut species, including 47 in Arachis hypogea, 23 in Arachis duranensis, and 24 in Arachis ipaensis. We observed significant variations in the exon-intron structure of these genes, while the motifs and domain structures remained highly conserved. Phylogenetic analysis enabled us to categorize the predicted 286 SWEET proteins from eleven species into seven distinct groups. Whole genome duplication/segment duplication and tandem duplication were the primary mechanisms contributing to the expansion of the total number of SWEET genes. In addition, an investigation of cis-elements in the potential promoter regions and expression profiles across 22 samples uncovered the diverse expression patterns of AhSWEET genes in peanuts. AhSWEET24, with the highest expression level in seeds from A. hypogaea Tifrunner, was observed to be localized on both the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Moreover, qRT-PCR results suggested that twelve seed-expressed AhSWEET genes were important in the regulation of seed development across four different peanut varieties. Together, our results provide a foundational basis for future investigations into the functions of SWEET genes in peanuts, especially in the process of seed development.
Backgroud The genus Mesorhizobium is shown by phylogenomics to be paraphyletic and forms part of a complex that includes the genera Aminobacter, Aquamicrobium, Pseudaminobacter and Tianweitania. The relationships for type strains belong to these genera need to be carefully re-evaluated. Results The relationships of Mesorhizobium complex are evaluated based on phylogenomic analyses and overall genome relatedness indices (OGRIs) of 61 type strains. According to the maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree based on concatenated sequences of 539 core proteins and the tree constructed using the bac120 bacterial marker set from Genome Taxonomy Database, 65 type strains were grouped into 9 clusters. Moreover, 10 subclusters were identified based on the OGRIs including average nucleotide identity (ANI), average amino acid identity (AAI) and core-proteome average amino acid identity (cAAI), with AAI and cAAI showing a clear intra- and inter-(sub)cluster gaps of 77.40-80.91% and 83.98-86.16%, respectively. Combined with the phylogenetic trees and OGRIs, the type strains were reclassified into 15 genera. This list includes five defined genera Mesorhizobium, Aquamicrobium, Pseudaminobacter, Aminobacterand Tianweitania, among which 40/41 Mesorhizobium species and one Aminobacter species are canonical legume microsymbionts. The other nine (sub)clusters are classified as novel genera. Cluster III, comprising symbiotic M. alhagi and M. camelthorni, is classified as Allomesorhizobium gen. nov. Cluster VI harbored a single symbiotic species M. albiziae and is classified as Neomesorhizobium gen. nov. The remaining seven non-symbiotic members were proposed as: Neoaquamicrobium gen. nov., Manganibacter gen. nov., Ollibium gen. nov., Terribium gen. nov., Kumtagia gen. nov., Borborobacter gen. nov., Aerobium gen. nov.. Furthermore, the genus Corticibacterium is restored and two species in Subcluster IX-1 are reclassified as the member of this genus. Conclusion The Mesorhizobium complex are classified into 15 genera based on phylogenomic analyses and OGRIs of 65 type strains. This study resolved previously non-monophyletic genera in the Mesorhizobium complex.
Background Nitzschia closterium f. minutissima is a commonly available diatom that plays important roles in marine aquaculture. It was originally classified as Nitzschia (Bacillariaceae, Bacillariophyta) but is currently regarded as a heterotypic synonym of Phaeodactylum tricornutum. The aim of this study was to obtain the draft genome of the marine microalga N. closterium f. minutissima to understand its phylogenetic placement and evolutionary specialization. Given that the ornate hierarchical silicified cell walls (frustules) of diatoms have immense applications in nanotechnology for biomedical fields, biosensors and optoelectric devices, transcriptomic data were generated by using reference genome-based read mapping to identify significantly differentially expressed genes and elucidate the molecular processes involved in diatom biosilicification. Results In this study, we generated 13.81 Gb of pass reads from the PromethION sequencer. The draft genome of N. closterium f. minutissima has a total length of 29.28 Mb, and contains 28 contigs with an N50 value of 1.23 Mb. The GC content was 48.55%, and approximately 18.36% of the genome assembly contained repeat sequences. Gene annotation revealed 9,132 protein-coding genes. The results of comparative genomic analysis showed that N. closterium f. minutissima was clustered as a sister lineage of Phaeodactylum tricornutum and the divergence time between them was estimated to be approximately 17.2 million years ago (Mya). CAFF analysis demonstrated that 220 gene families that significantly changed were unique to N. closterium f. minutissima and that 154 were specific to P. tricornutum, moreover, only 26 gene families overlapped between these two species. A total of 818 DEGs in response to silicon were identified in N. closterium f. minutissima through RNA sequencing, these genes are involved in various molecular processes such as transcription regulator activity. Several genes encoding proteins, including silicon transporters, heat shock factors, methyltransferases, ankyrin repeat domains, cGMP-mediated signaling pathways-related proteins, cytoskeleton-associated proteins, polyamines, glycoproteins and saturated fatty acids may contribute to the formation of frustules in N. closterium f. minutissima. Conclusions Here, we described a draft genome of N. closterium f. minutissima and compared it with those of eight other diatoms, which provided new insight into its evolutionary features. Transcriptome analysis to identify DEGs in response to silicon will help to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanism of diatom biosilicification in N. closterium f. minutissima.
BackgroundHypoxia negatively affects the behavior, growth, reproduction and survival of fish, causing serious economic losses to aquaculture. Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), an important economic fish worldwide, belongs to a hypoxia-sensitive fish species, however, little is known about the regulatory mechanism of microRNAs (miRNAs) under hypoxia stress.ResultsRainbow trout were subjected to hypoxia stress for 3 h (H3h_L), 12 h (H12h_L), 24 h (H24h_L) and 3 h reoxygenation (R3h_L) to systemically evaluate the changes of miRNA expression profiles in liver, and functions of sha-miR-92a_L + 2R + 4 were investigated. We found 17, 144, 57 and 55 differentially expressed (DE) miRNAs in the H3h_L vs. control (N_L), H12h_L vs. N_L, H24h_L vs. N_L and R3h_L vs. N_L comparisons, respectively. Enrichment analysis revealed that the targets of DE miRNAs were significantly enriched in HIF signaling pathway, VEGF signaling pathway, FoxO signaling pathway and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. Through miRNA-mRNA interaction and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), five key DE miRNAs (sha-miR-92a_L + 2R + 4, ssa-miR-128-3p, ssa-miR-101b-3p_R + 1, ola-miR-199a-5p_R + 2 and tni-miR-199_1ss18CG) were identified, which can target at least two hypoxia-responsive genes, such as vegfaa, ho, glut1a and junb. Functional analysis found that sha-miR-92a_L + 2R + 4 directly regulated vegfaa expression by targeting its 3 '-UTR, overexpression of sha-miR-92a_L + 2R + 4 significantly decreased vegfaa expression in rainbow trout liver cells, while opposite results were obtained after transfection of sha-miR-92a_L + 2R + 4 inhibitor. Furthermore, overexpressed sha-miR-92a_L + 2R + 4 promoted rainbow trout liver cell proliferation and inhibited apoptosis.ConclusionThis study deepens our understanding of the crucial roles of miRNAs under hypoxia stress in rainbow trout. These results can contribute to devise strategies for improving rainbow trout survival rate and aquaculture production during hypoxia stress and help speeding up the selective breeding of hypoxia-tolerant rainbow trout.
BackgroundThe development and egg-laying performance of hens are precisely regulated by hormones secreted by the pituitary. In this study, we performed comprehensive transcriptome sequencing of pituitary from Hy-Line Brown hens at 15, 20, 30 and 68 W of age. Through association analysis, we identified key genes and ceRNA regulatory networks related to pituitary development and egg production.ResultsBased on the comprehensive transcriptome data, we identified 470 differentially expressed lncRNAs (DE-lncRNAs), 38 differentially expressed miRNAs (DE-miRNAs), and 2,449 differentially expressed mRNAs (DE-mRNAs). Time-series analysis pinpointed genes and signaling pathways that significantly influence pituitary hormone secretion at various stages. At 15 W, the high expression of GHRHR, NPY1R, and TSHR in the pituitary supports growth. At 20 and 30 W, elevated GNRHR expression sustains continuous egg production. In the late laying period, the expression of PRL may lead to a decline in egg production. Additionally, association analysis enabled the construction of a ceRNA regulatory network involving non-coding RNAs that regulate the development and reproduction of hens.ConclusionThis study elucidated the comprehensive transcriptome expression profiles of the pituitary gland during the development and egg-laying processes in Hy-Line Brown hens and constructed the associated molecular regulatory networks. These findings lay the foundation for investigating the mechanisms by which non-coding RNAs regulate pituitary hormone secretion.
BackgroundFirmiana danxiaensis is a critically endangered and ecologically important tree currently only found in four locations in Danxia or Karst habitats in northern Guangdong Province, China. The specialized habitat preference makes it an ideal model species for study of adaptive evolution. Meanwhile, the phylogenetic relationships of F. danxiaensis in four locations under two landforms are unclear. Therefore, we sequenced its complete chloroplast (cp.) genomes and conducted comprehensive interspecific and intrageneric plastome studies. ResultsThe F. danxiaensis plastomes in four locations showed a typical quadripartite and circular structure that ranged from 160,832 to 161,206 bp in size, with 112 unique genes encoded. Comparative genomics showed that the plastomes of F. danxiaensis were relatively conserved with high similarity of genome organization, gene number, GC content and SSRs. While the genomes revealed higher biased codon preferences in Karst habitat than those in Danxia habitats. Eighteen and 11 divergent hotpots were identified at interspecific and intrageneric levels for species identification and further phylogenetic studies. Seven genes (clpP, accD, ccsA, ndhH, rpl20, rpoC2, and rps4) were under positive selection and may be related to adaptation. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that F. danxiaensis is sister to F. major and F. simplex. However, the interspecific relationships are not consistent with the habitat types. ConclusionsThe characteristics and interspecific relationship of F. danxiaensis plastomes provide new insights into further integration of geographical factors, environmental factors, and genetic variations on the genomic study of F. danxiaensis. Together, our study will contribute to the study of species identification, population genetics, and conservation biology of F. danxiaensis.
Background The respiratory chain plays a key role in the growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC). However, the exact regulatory mechanisms of this system still need to be elucidated, and only a few studies have investigated the impact of genetic mutations within the respiratory chain on MTBC transmission. This study aims to explore the impact of respiratory chain gene mutations on the global spread of MTBC. Results A total of 13,402 isolates of MTBC were included in this study. The majority of the isolates (n = 6,382, 47.62%) belonged to lineage 4, followed by lineage 2 (n = 5,123, 38.23%). Our findings revealed significant associations between Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) of specific genes and transmission clusters. These SNPs include Rv0087 (hycE, G178T), Rv1307 (atpH, C650T), Rv2195 (qcrA, G181C), Rv2196 (qcrB, G1250T), Rv3145 (nuoA, C35T), Rv3149 (nuoE, G121C), Rv3150 (nuoF, G700A), Rv3151 (nuoG, A1810G), Rv3152 (nuoH, G493A), and Rv3157 (nuoM, A1243G). Furthermore, our results showed that the SNPs of atpH C73G, atpA G271C, qcrA G181C, nuoJ G115A, nuoM G772A, and nuoN G1084T were positively correlated with cross-country transmission clades and cross-regional transmission clades. Conclusions Our study uncovered an association between mutations in respiratory chain genes and the transmission of MTBC. This important finding provides new insights for future research and will help to further explore new mechanisms of MTBC pathogenicity. By uncovering this association, we gain a more complete understanding of the processes by which MTBC increases virulence and spread, providing potential targets and strategies for preventing and treating tuberculosis.
Background Iron plays a crucial role in the growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis). However, the precise regulatory mechanism governing this system requires further elucidation. Additionally, limited studies have examined the impact of gene mutations related to iron on the transmission of M. tuberculosis globally. This research aims to investigate the correlation between mutations in iron-related genes and the worldwide transmission of M. tuberculosis. Results A total of 13,532 isolates of M. tuberculosis were included in this study. Among them, 6,104 (45.11%) were identified as genomic clustered isolates, while 8,395 (62.04%) were classified as genomic clade isolates. Our results showed that a total of 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) showed a positive correlation with clustering, such as Rv1469 (ctpD, C758T), Rv3703c (etgB, G1122T), and Rv3743c (ctpJ, G676C). Additionally, seven SNPs, including Rv0104 (T167G, T478G), Rv0211 (pckA, A302C), Rv0283 (eccB3, C423T), Rv1436 (gap, G654T), ctpD C758T, and etgB C578A, demonstrated a positive correlation with transmission clades across different countries. Notably, our findings highlighted the positive association of Rv0104 T167G, pckA A302C, eccB3 C423T, ctpD C758T, and etgB C578A with transmission clades across diverse regions. Furthermore, our analysis identified 78 SNPs that exhibited significant associations with clade size. Conclusions Our study reveals the link between iron-related gene SNPs and M. tuberculosis transmission, offering insights into crucial factors influencing the pathogenicity of the disease. This research holds promise for targeted strategies in prevention and treatment, advancing research and interventions in this field.
Background Universal stress proteins (USPs) are a class of stress-induced proteins that play a crucial role in biotic and abiotic stress responses. These proteins have previously been reported to participate directly in responses to various stress and protect plants against unfavorable environmental conditions. However, there is limited research on USPs in cotton, and systematic characterization of USPs in Gossypium species is lacking.Results In the present study, the USP genes in Gossypium hirsutum were systematically identified and classified into six distinct subfamilies. The expansion of USPs in Gossypium species is mainly caused by dispersed duplication and whole genome duplication. Notably, the USPs that have expanded through allotetraploidization events are highly conserved in the allotetraploid species. The promoter regions of GhUSPs contain a diverse range of cis-acting elements associated with stress response. The RNA-Seq analysis and RT-qPCR assays revealed a significant induction of numerous GhUSPs expressions in response to various abiotic stresses. The co-expression network of GhUSPs revealed their involvement in stress response.Conclusions This study systematically analyzed the biological characteristics of GhUSPs and their response to abiotic stress. These findings serve as a theoretical basis for facilitating the breeding of cotton varieties in future research.
Background The TCP (teosinte branched1/cincinnata/proliferating cell factor) family plays a prominent role in plant development and stress responses. However, TCP family genes have thus far not been identified in castor bean, and therefore an understanding of the expression and functional aspects of castor bean TCP genes is lacking. To identify the potential biological functions of castor bean (RcTCP) TCP members, the composition of RcTCP family members, their basic physicochemical properties, subcellular localizations, interacting proteins, miRNA target sites, and gene expression patterns under stress were assessed. Results The presence of 20 RcTCP genes on the nine chromosomes of castor bean was identified, all of which possess TCP domains. Phylogenetic analysis indicated a close relationship between RcTCP genes and Arabidopsis AtTCP genes, suggesting potential functional similarity. Subcellular localization experiments confirmed that RcTC01/02/03/10/16/18 are all localized in the nucleus. Protein interaction analysis revealed that the interaction quantity of RcTCP03/06/11 proteins is the highest, indicating a cascade response in the functional genes. Furthermore, it was found that the promoter region of RcTCP genes contains a large number of stress-responsive elements and hormone-induced elements, indicating a potential link between RcTCP genes and stress response functions. qRT-PCR showed that all RcTCP genes exhibit a distinct tissue-specific expression pattern and their expression is induced by abiotic stress (including low temperature, abscisic acid, drought, and high salt). Among them, RcTCP01/03/04/08/09/10/14/15/18/19 genes may be excellent stress-responsive genes. Conclusion We discovered that RcTCP genes play a crucial role in various activities, including growth and development, the stress response, and transcription. This study provides a basis for studying the function of RcTCP gene in castor.
Background Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi has been extensively used as a medicinal herb in China for over 2000 years. They may be intentionally or inadvertently substituted or blended with comparable species in the local market, threatening clinical medication safety. Molecular markers are effective tools to prevent misidentification and eliminate doping and falsification among Scutellaria plants. This study screened four highly variable regions to identify Scutellaria and its adulterants. In addition, a phylogenetic analysis was performed using the complete cp genome combined with published Scutellaria species samples. Moreover, a comparative analysis of the cp genomes was conducted to investigate the cp genome evolution of S. baicalensis.Results The complete cp genome of five species of Scutellaria was sequenced for the first time, and four previously published Scutellaria species were re-sequenced. They all exhibited a conserved quadripartite structure in their cp genomes, including two distinct regions, namely a small and large single copy region, respectively, and two inverted repeats encompassing the majority of ribosomal RNA genes. Furthermore, the nine species exhibited high conservation from aspects of the genome structure, codon usage, repeat sequences, and gene content. Four highly variable regions (matK-rps16, ndhC-trnV-UAC, psbE-petL, and rps16-trnQ-UUG) may function as potential molecular markers for differentiating S. baicalensis from its adulterants. Additionally, the monophyly of Scutellaria was ascertained and could be reclassified into two subgenera, subgenus Anaspis and subgenus Scutellaria, as evidenced by the phylogenetic analyses on sequences of cp genome and shared protein-coding sequences. According to the molecular clock analysis, it has been inferred that the divergence of Scutellaria occurred at approximately 4.0 Mya during the Pliocene Epoch.Conclusion Our study provides an invaluable theoretical basis for further Scutellaria species identification, phylogenetics, and evolution analysis.
BackgroundRye (Secale cereale L.) is the most widely used related species in wheat genetic breeding, and the introduction of its chromosome fragments into the wheat genome through distant hybridization is essential for enriching the genetic diversity of wheat. Rapid and accurate detection of rye chromatin in the wheat genome is important for distant hybridization. Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are widely distributed in the genome, and SSRs of different species often exhibit species-specific characteristics.ResultsIn this study, genome-wide SSRs in rye were identified, and their characteristics were outlined. A total of 997,027 SSRs were selected, with a density of 115.97 SSRs/Mb on average. There was no significant difference in the number of SSRs on each chromosome. The number of SSRs on 2R was the highest (15.29%), and the number of SSRs on 1R was the lowest (13.02%). The number of SSRs on each chromosome is significantly correlated with chromosome length. The types of SSR motifs were abundant, and each type of SSR was distributed on 7 chromosomes of rye. The numbers of mononucleotide simple sequence repeats (MNRs), dinucleotide simple sequence repeats (DNRs), and trinucleotide simple sequence repeats (TNRs) were the greatest, accounting for 46.90%, 18.37%, and 22.64% of the total number, respectively. Among the MNRs, the number of G/C repeats and the number of 10 bp motifs were the greatest, accounting for 26.24% and 31.32% of the MNRs, respectively. Based on the SSR sequences, a total of 657 pairs of primers were designed. The PCR results showed that 119 pairs of these primers were rye-specific and could effectively detect rye chromatin in the wheat genome. Moreover, 86 pairs of the primers could also detect one or more specific rye chromosomes.ConclusionThese results lay a foundation for both genomic evolution studies of rye and molecular breeding in wheat.
Background Cephalanthera nanchuanica is a terrestrial orchid species and has been red listed as a second-grade protected plant due to its limited distributions in China. Initially classified within a monotypic genus Tangtsinia, this species was later reassigned to Cephalanthera based on morphological and molecular data. However, previous phylogenetic analyses of Cephalanthera using several segment sequences exhibited a low discriminatory power in delineating its relationships. Results In this study, we characterized and comparatively analyzed the complete chloroplast (cp) genome of C. nanchuanica with those of six previously reported Cephalanthera species. Our findings revealed that the cp genome of C. nanchuanica had the typical quadripartite structure, with a size of 161,365 bp and a GC content of 37.27%. A total of 113 unique genes were annotated, among which nearly half of protein-encoding genes (RSCU > 1) showed a preference in codon usage. No structural rearrangements were observed among the cp genomes of Cephalanthera species, except for C. humilis, which displayed structural alterations due to gene loss, relocation, and inverted repeat (IR) expansion/contraction. The cp genomes of Cephalanthera species were highly conserved, with only a small number of SSRs detected, most of which preferred A/T bases. Comparative analysis of cp genomes indicated that IR and coding regions were less divergent than single copy and non-coding regions and eight mutational hotspots were identified. Phylogenetic analysis suggested that the tribe Neottieae was a monophyletic group, divided into five clades. Palmorchis was the earliest-diverging lineage, followed by Cephalanthera. Diplandrorchis was deeply nested within Neottia, forming a clade. Aphyllorchis and Limodorum formed another clade, sister to Epipactis. Within the Cephalanthera clade, C. nanchuanica was sister to C. falcata with a strong support. Conclusions This study demonstrated that the cp genome characters of C. nanchuanica are highly similar to those of other Cephalanthera species, except for the mycoheterotrophic species C. humilis. Although the cp genomes of Cephalanthera species (excluding C. humilis) exhibited conservation in genome structure and sequence, SSR repeats and mutational hotspots were identified, which could potentially serve as as molecular markers for distinguishing Cephalanthera species. The phylogenetic analysis based on the protein-coding genes provided high-resolution support for the infrageneric classification. Therefore, cp genome data will be instrumental in resolving the phylogeny of the genus Cephalanthera.
Background Plant-specific TIFY proteins play crucial roles in regulating plant growth, development, and various stress responses. However, there is no information available about this family in Artemisia argyi, a well-known traditional medicinal plant with great economic value. Results A total of 34 AaTIFY genes were identified, including 4 TIFY, 22 JAZ, 5 PPD, and 3 ZML genes. Structural, motif scanning, and phylogenetic relationships analysis of these genes revealed that members within the same group or subgroup exhibit similar exon-intron structures and conserved motif compositions. The TIFY genes were unevenly distributed across the 15 chromosomes. Tandem duplication events and segmental duplication events have been identified in the TIFY family in A. argyi. These events have played a crucial role in the gene multiplication and compression of different subfamilies within the TIFY family. Promoter analysis revealed that most AaTIFY genes contain multiple cis-elements associated with stress response, phytohormone signal transduction, and plant growth and development. Expression analysis of roots and leaves using RNA-seq data revealed that certain AaTIFY genes showed tissue-specific expression patterns, and some AaTIFY genes, such as AaTIFY19/29, were found to be involved in regulating salt and saline-alkali stresses. In addition, RT-qPCR analysis showed that TIFY genes, especially AaTIFY19/23/27/29, respond to a variety of hormonal treatments, such as MeJA, ABA, SA, and IAA. This suggested that TIFY genes in A. argyi regulate plant growth and respond to different stresses by following different hormone signaling pathways. Conclusion Taken together, our study conducted a comprehensive identification and analysis of the TIFY gene family in A. argyi. These findings suggested that TIFY might play an important role in plant development and stress responses, which laid a valuable foundation for further understanding the function of TIFY genes in multiple stress responses and phytohormone crosstalk in A. argyi.
BackgroundThe mediator complex subunits (MED) constitutes a multiprotein complex, with each subunit intricately involved in crucial aspects of plant growth, development, and responses to stress. Nevertheless, scant reports pertain to the VunMED gene within the context of asparagus bean (Vigna unguiculata ssp. sesquipedialis). Establishing the identification and exploring the responsiveness of VunMED to cold stress forms a robust foundation for the cultivation of cold-tolerant asparagus bean cultivars. ResultsWithin this study, a comprehensive genome-wide identification of VunMED genes was executed in the asparagus bean cultivar 'Ningjiang3', resulting in the discovery of 36 distinct VunMED genes. A phylogenetic analysis encompassing 232 MED genes from diverse species, including Arabidopsis, tomatoes, soybeans, mung beans, cowpeas, and asparagus beans, underscored the highly conserved nature of MED gene sequences. Throughout evolutionary processes, each VunMED gene underwent purification and neutral selection, with the exception of VunMED19a. Notably, VunMED9/10b/12/13/17/23 exhibited structural variations discernible across four cowpea species. Divergent patterns of temporal and spatial expression were evident among VunMED genes, with a prominent role attributed to most genes during early fruit development. Additionally, an analysis of promoter cis-acting elements was performed, followed by qRT-PCR assessments on roots, stems, and leaves to gauge relative expression after exposure to cold stress and subsequent recovery. Both treatments induced transcriptional alterations in VunMED genes, with particularly pronounced effects observed in root-based genes following cold stress. Elucidating the interrelationships between subunits involved a preliminary understanding facilitated by correlation and principal component analyses. ConclusionsThis study elucidates the pivotal contribution of VunMED genes to the growth, development, and response to cold stress in asparagus beans. Furthermore, it offers a valuable point of reference regarding the individual roles of MED subunits.
BackgroundSET domain-containing histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs) and JmjC domain-containing histone demethylases (JHDMs) are essential for maintaining dynamic changes in histone methylation across parasite development and infection. However, information on the HKMTs and JHDMs in human pathogenic piroplasms, such as Babesia duncani and Babesia microti, and in veterinary important pathogens, including Babesia bigemina, Babesia bovis, Theileria annulata and Theileria parva, is limited.ResultsA total of 38 putative KMTs and eight JHDMs were identified using a comparative genomics approach. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the putative KMTs can be divided into eight subgroups, while the JHDMs belong to the JARID subfamily, except for BdJmjC1 (BdWA1_000016) and TpJmjC1 (Tp Muguga_02g00471) which cluster with JmjC domain only subfamily members. The motifs of SET and JmjC domains are highly conserved among piroplasm species. Interspecies collinearity analysis provided insight into the evolutionary duplication events of some SET domain and JmjC domain gene families. Moreover, relative gene expression analysis by RT-qPCR demonstrated that the putative KMT and JHDM gene families were differentially expressed in different intraerythrocytic developmental stages of B. duncani, suggesting their role in Apicomplexa parasite development.ConclusionsOur study provides a theoretical foundation and guidance for understanding the basic characteristics of several important piroplasm KMT and JHDM families and their biological roles in parasite differentiation.
Background The breeder rooster has played a pivotal role in poultry production by providing high-quality semen. Typically, fertility peaks between 30 and 40 weeks of age and then declines rapidly from 45 to 55 weeks of age. Research into improving fertility in aging roosters is essential to extend their productive life. While progress has been made, enhancing fertility in aging roosters remains a significant challenge. Methods To identify the genes related to promoting sperm remodeling in aged Houdan roosters, we combined changes in testis and semen quality with transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) to analyze the synchrony of semen quality and testis development. In this study, 350-day-old Houdan breeder roosters were selected for RNA-seq analysis in testis tissues from induced molting roosters (D group) and non-induced molting roosters (47DG group). All analyses of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and functional enrichment were performed. Finally, we selected six DEGs to verify the accuracy of the sequencing by qPCR. Results Compared with the 47DG group, sperm motility (P < 0.05), sperm density (P < 0.01), and testis weight (P < 0.05) were significantly increased in roosters in the D group. Further RNA-seq analysis of the testis between the D group and 47DG group identified 61 DEGs, with 21 up-regulated and 40 down-regulated. Functional enrichment analysis showed that the DEGs were primarily enriched in the cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, Wnt signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, TGF-beta signaling pathway, and focal adhesion pathway. The qRT-PCR results showed that the expression trend of these genes was consistent with the sequencing results. WNT5A, FGFR3, AGTR2, TGF beta 2, ROMO1, and SLC26A7 may play a role in testis development and spermatogenesis. This study provides fundamental data to enhance the reproductive value of aging roosters.
Background High-mobility group B1 (HMGB1) is both a DNA binding nuclear factor modulating transcription and a crucial cytokine that mediates the response to both infectious and noninfectious inflammation such as autoimmunity, cancer, trauma, and ischemia reperfusion injury. HMGB1 has been proposed to control ribosome biogenesis, similar as the other members of a class of HMGB proteins.Results Here, we report that HMGB1 selectively promotes transcription of genes involved in the regulation of transcription, osteoclast differentiation and apoptotic process. Improved RNA immunoprecipitation by UV cross-linking and deep sequencing (iRIP-seq) experiment revealed that HMGB1 selectively bound to mRNAs functioning not only in signal transduction and gene expression, but also in axon guidance, focal adhesion, and extracellular matrix organization. Importantly, HMGB1-bound reads were strongly enriched in specific structured RNAs, including the domain II of 28S rRNA, H/ACA box snoRNAs including snoRNA63 and scaRNAs. RTL-P experiment showed that overexpression of HMGB1 led to a decreased methylation modification of 28S rRNA at position Am2388, Cm2409, and Gm2411. We further showed that HMGB1 overexpression increased ribosome RNA expression levels and enhanced protein synthesis.Conclusion Taken together, our results support a model in which HMGB1 binds to multiple RNA species in human cancer cells, which could at least partially contribute to HMGB1-modulated rRNA modification, protein synthesis function of ribosomes, and differential gene expression including rRNA genes. These findings provide additional mechanistic clues to HMGB1 functions in cancers and cell differentiation.
Nanopore sequencing enables detection of DNA methylation at the same time as identification of canonical sequence. A recent study validated low-pass nanopore sequencing to accurately estimate global methylation levels in vertebrates with sequencing coverage as low as 0.01x. We investigated the applicability of this approach to plants by testing three plant species and analysed the effect of technical and biological parameters on estimate precision and accuracy. Our results indicate that higher coverage (0.1x) is required to achieve accuracy in assessing plant global methylation comparable to that in vertebrates. Shorter read length and a closer sequence match between sample and reference genome improved measurement accuracy. Application of this method in Vitis vinifera showed consistent global methylation levels across different leaf sizes, and different sample preservation and DNA extraction methods, whereas different varieties and tissue types did exhibit methylation differences. Similarly, distinct methylation patterns were observed in different genomic features. Our findings suggest the suitability of this method as a low-cost screening tool for validation of experimental parameters, developmental time courses, and to assess methylation status for different modification types and sequence contexts at the level of whole genome or for abundant genomic features such as transposable elements.
BackgroundTeat number is a vital reproductive trait in sows, crucial for providing immunity and nutrition to piglets during lactation. However, "missing heritability" in Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)-based Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) has led to an increasing focus on structural variations in the genetic analysis of complex biological traits.ResultsIn this study, we generated a comprehensive CNV map in a population of French Yorkshire pigs (n = 644) and identified 429 CNVRs. Notably, 44% (189 CNVRs) of these were detected for the first time. Subsequently, we conducted GWAS for teat number in the French Yorkshire pig population using both 80K chip and its imputed data, as well as a GWAS analysis based on CNV regions (CNVR). Interestingly, 80K chip GWAS identified two SNPs located on Sus scrofa chromosome 5 (SSC5) that were simultaneously associated with Total Teat Number (TTN), Left Teat Number (LTN), and Right Teat Number (RTN). The leading SNP (WU_10.2_5_76130558) explained 3.33%, 2.69%, and 2.67% of the phenotypic variance for TTN, LTN, and RTN, respectively. Moreover, through imputed GWAS, we successfully identified 30 genetic variants associated with TTN located within the 73.22 -73.30 Mb region on SSC5. The two SNPs identified in the 80K chip GWAS were also located in this region. In addition, CNVR-based GWAS revealed three significant CNVRs associated with TTN. Finally, through gene annotation, we pinpointed two candidate genes, TRIM66 and PRICKLE1, which are related to diverse processes such as breast cancer and abnormal vertebral development.ConclusionsOur research provides an in-depth analysis of the complex genetic structure underlying teat number, contributing to the genetic enhancement of sows with improved reproductive performance and, ultimately, bolstering the economic benefits of swine production enterprises.
Assessing the genetic structure of local varieties and understanding their genetic data are crucial for effective management and preservation. However, the genetic differences among local breeds require further explanation. To enhance our understanding of their population structure and genetic diversity, we conducted a genome-wide comparative study of Chaohu and Ji'an Red ducks using genome sequence and restriction site-associated DNA sequencing technology. Our analysis revealed a distinct genetic distinction between the two breeds, leading to divided groups. The phylogenetic tree for Chaohu duck displayed two branches, potentially indicating minimal impact from artificial selection. Additionally, our ROH (runs of homozygosity) analysis revealed that Chaohu ducks had a lower average inbreeding coefficient than Ji'an Red ducks. We identified several genomic regions with high genetic similarity in these indigenous duck breeds. By conducting a selective sweep analysis, we identified 574 candidate genes associated with muscle growth (BMP2, ITGA8, MYLK, and PTCH1), fat deposits (ELOVL1 and HACD2), and pigmentation (ASIP and LOC101797494). These results offer valuable insights for the further enhancement and conservation of Chinese indigenous duck breeds.
Dinoflagellates are a remarkable group of protists, not only for their association with harmful algal blooms and coral reefs but also for their numerous characteristics deviating from the rules of eukaryotic biology. Genome research on dinoflagellates has lagged due to their immense genome sizes in most species (similar to 1-250 Gbp). Nevertheless, the last decade marked a fruitful era of dinoflagellate genomics, with 27 genomes sequenced and many insights attained. This review aims to synthesize information from these genomes, along with other omic data, to reflect on where we are now in understanding dinoflagellates and where we are heading in the future. The most notable insights from the decade-long genomics work include: (1) dinoflagellate genomes have been expanded in multiple times independently, probably by a combination of rampant retroposition, accumulation of repetitive DNA, and genome duplication; (2) Symbiodiniacean genomes are highly divergent, but share about 3,445 core unigenes concentrated in 219 KEGG pathways; (3) Most dinoflagellate genes are encoded unidirectionally and are not intron-poor; (4) The dinoflagellate nucleus has undergone extreme evolutionary changes, including complete or nearly complete loss of nucleosome and histone H1, and acquisition of dinoflagellate viral nuclear protein (DVNP); (5) Major basic nuclear protein (MBNP), histone-like protein (HLP), and bacterial HU-like protein (HCc) belong to the same protein family, and MBNP can be the unifying name; (6) Dinoflagellate gene expression is regulated by poorly understood mechanisms, but microRNA and other epigenetic mechanisms are likely important; (7) Over 50% of dinoflagellate genes are "dark" and their functions remain to be deciphered using functional genetics; (8) Initial insights into the genomic basis of parasitism and mutualism have emerged. The review then highlights functionally unique and interesting genes. Future research needs to obtain a finished genome, tackle large genomes, characterize the unknown genes, and develop a quantitative molecular ecological model for addressing ecological questions.
BackgroundAlternative splicing is a pivotal mechanism of post-transcriptional modification that contributes to the transcriptome plasticity and proteome diversity in metazoan cells. Although many splicing regulations around the exon/intron regions are known, the relationship between promoter-bound transcription factors and the downstream alternative splicing largely remains unexplored.ResultsIn this study, we present computational approaches to unravel the regulatory relationship between promoter-bound transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) and the splicing patterns. We curated a fine dataset that includes DNase I hypersensitive site sequencing and transcriptomes across fifteen human tissues from ENCODE. Specifically, we proposed different representations of TF binding context and splicing patterns to examine the associations between the promoter and downstream splicing events. While machine learning models demonstrated potential in predicting splicing patterns based on TFBS occupancies, the limitations in the generalization of predicting the splicing forms of singleton genes across diverse tissues was observed with carefully examination using different cross-validation methods. We further investigated the association between alterations in individual TFBS at promoters and shifts in exon splicing efficiency. Our results demonstrate that the convolutional neural network (CNN) models, trained on TF binding changes in the promoters, can predict the changes in splicing patterns. Furthermore, a systemic in silico substitutions analysis on the CNN models highlighted several potential splicing regulators. Notably, using empirical validation using K562 CTCFL shRNA knock-down data, we showed the significant role of CTCFL in splicing regulation.ConclusionIn conclusion, our finding highlights the potential role of promoter-bound TFBSs in influencing the regulation of downstream splicing patterns and provides insights for discovering alternative splicing regulations.
Background Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) describes a group of progressive lung diseases causing breathing difficulties. While COPD development typically involves a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors, genetics play a role in disease susceptibility. This study used genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and polygenic risk score (PRS) to elucidate the genetic basis for COPD in Taiwanese patients.Results GWAS was performed on a Taiwanese COPD case-control cohort with a sample size of 5,442 cases and 17,681 controls. Additionally, the PRS was calculated and assessed in our target groups. GWAS results indicate that although there were no single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genome-wide significance, prominent COPD susceptibility loci on or nearby genes such as WWTR1, EXT1, INTU, MAP3K7CL, MAMDC2, BZW1/CLK1, LINC01197, LINC01894, and CFAP95 (C9orf135) were identified, which had not been reported in previous studies. Thirteen susceptibility loci, such as CHRNA4, AFAP1, and DTWD1, previously reported in other populations were replicated and confirmed to be associated with COPD in Taiwanese populations. The PRS was determined in the target groups using the summary statistics from our base group, yielding an effective association with COPD (odds ratio [OR] 1.09, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.02-1.17, p = 0.011). Furthermore, replication a previous lung function trait PRS model in our target group, showed a significant association of COPD susceptibility with PRS of Forced Expiratory Volume in one second (FEV1)/Forced Vital Capacity (FCV) (OR 0.89, 95% CI 0.83-0.95, p = 0.001).Conclusions Novel COPD-related genes were identified in the studied Taiwanese population. The PRS model, based on COPD or lung function traits, enables disease risk estimation and enhances prediction before suffering. These results offer new perspectives on the genetics of COPD and serve as a basis for future research.
Background Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (CYP450s) play a crucial role in various biochemical reactions involved in the synthesis of antioxidants, pigments, structural polymers, and defense-related compounds in plants. As sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas L.) holds significant economic importance, a comprehensive analysis of CYP450 genes in this plant species can offer valuable insights into the evolutionary relationships and functional characteristics of these genes.Results In this study, we successfully identified and categorized 95 CYP450 genes from the sweet potato genome into 5 families and 31 subfamilies. The predicted subcellular localization results indicate that CYP450s are distributed in the cell membrane system. The promoter region of the IbCYP450 genes contains various cis-acting elements related to plant hormones and stress responses. In addition, ten conserved motifs (Motif1-Motif10) have been identified in the IbCYP450 family proteins, with 5 genes lacking introns and only one exon. We observed extensive duplication events within the CYP450 gene family, which may account for its expansion. The gene duplication analysis results showed the presence of 15 pairs of genes with tandem repeats. Interaction network analysis reveals that IbCYP450 families can interact with multiple target genes and there are protein-protein interactions within the family. Transcription factor interaction analysis suggests that IbCYP450 families interact with multiple transcription factors. Furthermore, gene expression analysis revealed tissue-specific expression patterns of CYP450 genes in sweet potatoes, as well as their response to abiotic stress and plant hormones. Notably, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis indicated the involvement of CYP450 genes in the defense response against nonbiological stresses in sweet potatoes.Conclusions These findings provide a foundation for further investigations aiming to elucidate the biological functions of CYP450 genes in sweet potatoes.
Background Mitochondrial diseases (MDs) can be caused by single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and structural variants (SVs) in the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA). Presently, identifying deletions in small to medium-sized fragments and accurately detecting low-percentage variants remains challenging due to the limitations of next-generation sequencing (NGS). Methods In this study, we integrated targeted long-range polymerase chain reaction (LR-PCR) and PacBio HiFi sequencing to analyze 34 participants, including 28 patients and 6 controls. Of these, 17 samples were subjected to both targeted LR-PCR and to compare the mtDNA variant detection efficacy. Results Among the 28 patients tested by long-read sequencing (LRS), 2 patients were found positive for the m.3243 A > G hotspot variant, and 20 patients exhibited single or multiple deletion variants with a proportion exceeding 4%. Comparison between the results of LRS and NGS revealed that both methods exhibited similar efficacy in detecting SNVs exceeding 5%. However, LRS outperformed NGS in detecting SNVs with a ratio below 5%. As for SVs, LRS identified single or multiple deletions in 13 out of 17 cases, whereas NGS only detected single deletions in 8 cases. Furthermore, deletions identified by LRS were validated by Sanger sequencing and quantified in single muscle fibers using real-time PCR. Notably, LRS also effectively and accurately identified secondary mtDNA deletions in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs). Conclusions LRS outperforms NGS in detecting various types of SNVs and SVs in mtDNA, including those with low frequencies. Our research is a significant advancement in medical comprehension and will provide profound insights into genetics.
Background Late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins play important roles in plant growth and development, as well as stresses responsiveness. Nowadays, it has been found that LEAs also have function in fruit ripening. However, the comprehensive analysis on a genome-wide basis of LEA family remains limited, and the role of LEA in fruit ripening has not been fully explored yet, especially in strawberry, an economic important plant and ideal material for studying fruit ripening. Results In this study, a total of 266 putative LEA proteins were identified and characterized in strawberry genome. Subcellular localization prediction indicated that they were mostly localized in chloroplast, cytoplasm and nucleus. Duplication events detection revealed that whole genome duplication or segmental was the main driver for the expansion of LEA family in strawberry. The phylogenetic analysis suggested that FaLEAs were classified into eight groups, among which, LEA2 was the largest subgroup with 179 members, followed by LEA3, dehydrin (DHN), LEA4 and SMP (seed maturation protein). The LEA1 and DHN groups were speculated to play dominant roles in strawberry fruit development and ripening, according to their larger proportion of members detected as differentially expressed genes during such process. Notably, the expression of FaLEA167 belonging to LEA1 group was altered by strawberry maturation, and inhibited by overexpression of negative regulators of ripening (a cytosolic/plastid glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, FaGAPC2 and a cytosolic pyruvate kinase, FaPKc2.2). Subsequently, overexpression of FaLEA167 significantly increased the percentage of fruit at green stage, while reduced the full red fruit proportion. In consistent, the anthocyanins content and the fruit skin color variable reflecting a range from greenness to redness (a* value) were significantly reduced. Whereas, FaLEA167 overexpression apparently up-regulated citric acid, soluble protein and malondialdehyde content, but had no obvious effects on total soluble solids, sugar, flavonoids, phenolics content and antioxidant capacity. Conclusions These findings not only provided basic information of FaLEA family for further functional research, but also revealed the involvement of FaLEA167 in negatively regulating strawberry fruit ripening, giving new insights into understanding of FaLEA functions.
Background The transcriptome and metabolome dissection of the skeletal muscle of high- and low- growing individuals from a crossbred population of the indigenous Chongming white goat and the Boer goat were performed to discover the potential functional differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differential expression metabolites (DEMs).Results A total of 2812 DEGs were detected in 6 groups at three time stages (3,6,12 Month) in skeletal muscle using the RNA-seq method. A DEGs set containing seven muscle function related genes (TNNT1, TNNC1, TNNI1, MYBPC2, MYL2, MHY7, and CSRP3) was discovered, and their expression tended to increase as goat muscle development progressed. Seven DEGs (TNNT1, FABP3, TPM3, DES, PPP1R27, RCAN1, LMOD2) in the skeletal muscle of goats in the fast-growing and slow-growing groups was verified their expression difference by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Further, through the Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) approach, a total of 183 DEMs in various groups of the muscle samples and these DEMs such as Queuine and Keto-PGF1 alpha, which demonstrated different abundance between the goat fast-growing group and slow-growing group. Through weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA), the study correlated the DEGs with the DEMs and identified 4 DEGs modules associated with 18 metabolites.Conclusion This study benefits to dissection candidate genes and regulatory networks related to goat meat production performance, and the joint analysis of transcriptomic and metabolomic data provided insights into the study of goat muscle development.
Rye (Secale cereale L.) is one of the major cereal crop species in the Triticeae family and is known to be most tolerant to diverse abiotic stresses, such as cold, heat, osmotic, and salt stress. The EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR (EPF) and EPF-LIKE (EPFL) families of small secreted peptides act to regulate many aspects of plant growth and development; however, their functions are not widely characterized in rye. In this study, we identified 12 ScEPF/EPFL genes, which can be divided into six groups and are evenly distributed on six rye chromosomes. Further examination of the gene structure and protein conservation motifs of EPF/EPFL family members demonstrated the high conservation of the ScEPF/EPFL sequence. Interactions between ScEPF/EPFL proteins and promoters containing hormone- and stress-responsive cis-acting elements suggest that the regulation of ScEPF/EPFL expression is complex. Expression profiling analyses revealed that ScEPF/EPFL genes exhibited tissue-specific expression patterns. Notably, ScEPFL1,ScEPFL7, ScEPFL9, and ScEPFL10 displayed significantly higher expression levels in spikelets compared to other tissues. Moreover, fluorescence quantification experiments demonstrated that these genes exhibited distinct expression patterns in response to various stress conditions, suggesting that each gene plays a unique role in stress signaling pathways. Our research findings provide a solid basis for further investigation into the functions of ScEPF/EPFLs. Furthermore, these genes can serve as potential candidates for breeding stress-resistant rye varieties and improving production yields.
BackgroundCrossbreeding beef bulls with dairy cows can improve the economic value and fitness of calves not entering dairy production owing to increased meat yield and heterosis. However, outcrossing might reduce the dosage of alleles that confer local adaptation or result in a higher risk of dystocia due to increased calf size. Given the clear phenotypic differences between beef breeds, the varying phylogenetic distances between beef and dairy breeds, and the genomic variations within breeds, the attainable economic and fitness gains of calves will strongly depend on the selection of sires for crossing. Thus, the aim of this study was to assess genome complementarity between Angus (AAN), Limousin (LIM), or Simmental (SIM) beef bulls and Brown Swiss (BSW) dairy cows by quantifying genomic inbreeding reduction in F1 crosses and identifying genes potentially under BSW-specific selection that might be affected by outcrossing.ResultsLow-pass sequencing data from 181 cows, 34 bulls, and 301 of their F1 progeny, and body weight and carcass composition measurements of 248 F1s were obtained. The high genomic inbreeding levels detected in the BSW cows were substantially reduced in the crossbreds, with only minor differences between the sire breeds. In the BSW cows, 585 candidate genes under selection were identified, overrepresenting genes associated with milk, meat and carcass, and production traits. Only a few genes were strongly differentiated at nonsynonymous variants between the BSW and beef breeds, including four tightly clustered genes (FAM184B, NCAPG, DCAF16, and LCORL) nearly fixed for alternate alleles in the BSW cows but mostly heterozygous or homozygous for the reference alleles in the AAN and LIM bulls. The alternate allele dosage at these genes significantly correlated with reduced carcass weight and protein mass in F1s.ConclusionSome of the few genes that were highly divergent between the BSW and beef breeds at nonsynonymous variants were likely under strong selection for reduced carcass weight in the BSW breed, potentially due to trade-offs between beef and dairy productions. As alleles with opposing effects still segregate in beef cattle, marker-assisted selection of mating pairs may be used to modulate the desired phenotypes and simultaneously decrease genomic inbreeding.
The citral-type is the most common chemotype in Cinnamomum bodinieri Levl (C. bodinieri), which has been widely used in the daily necessities, cosmetics, biomedicine, and aromatic areas due to their high citral content. Despite of this economic prospect, the possible gene-regulatory roles of citral biosynthesis in the same geographic environment remains unknown. In this study, the essential oils (EOs) of three citral type (B1, B2, B3) and one non-citral type (B0) varieties of C. bodinieri were identified by GC-MS after hydrodistillation extraction in July. 43 components more than 0.10% were identified in the EOs, mainly composed of monoterpenes (75.8-91.84%), and high content citral (80.63-86.33%) were identified in citral-type. Combined transcriptome and metabolite profiling analysis, plant-pathogen interaction(ko04626), MAPK signaling pathway-plant(ko04016), starch and sucrose metabolism(ko00500), plant hormone signal transduction(ko04075), terpenoid backbone biosynthesis (ko00900) and monoterpenoid biosynthesis (ko00902) pathways were enriched significantly. The gene expression of differential genes were linked to the monoterpene content, and the geraniol synthase (CbGES), alcohol dehydrogenase (CbADH), geraniol 8-hydroxylase-like (CbCYP76B6-like) and 8-hydroxygeraniol dehydrogenase (Cb10HGO) were upregulated in the citral-type, indicating that they were associated with high content of geraniol and citral. The activities of CbGES and CbADH in citral type were higher than in non-citral type, which was corroborated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). This study on the accumulation mechanism of citral provides a theoretical basis for the development of essential oil of C. bodinieri.
Background Tiarella polyphylla D. Don has been traditionally used to cure asthma and skin eruptions. However, the sequence and the structure of the mitogenome of T. polyphylla remained elusive, limiting the genomic and evolution analysis based on the mitogenome. Results Using a combination of Illumina and Nanopore sequencing reads, we de novo assembled the complete mitogenome of T. polyphylla. In addition to unveiling the major configuration of the T. polyphylla mitogenome was three circular chromosomes with lengths of 430,435 bp, 126,943 bp, and 55,269 bp, we revealed five (R01-R05) and one (R06) repetitive sequence could mediate the intra- and inter-chromosomal recombination, respectively. Furthermore, we identified 208 short and 25 long tandem segments, seven cp-derived mtDNAs, 106 segments of mtDNAs transferred to the nuclear genome, and 653 predicted RNA editing sites. Based on the sequence of the mitogenomes, we obtained the resolved phylogeny of the seven Saxifragales species. Conclusions These results presented the mitogenome features and expanded its potential applications in phylogenetics, species identification, and cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) in the future.
Background Paulownia, an ecologically and economically valuable plant species native to China, is notable for its excellent timber quality and strong adaptability. Among them, Paulownia catalpifolia displays the ability to survive in cold climate, a trait associated with northern China. Yet, the molecular information for its cold-tolerance has not been explored. This study was to investigate the changes in physiological indices and transcript levels of P. catalpifolia following cold exposure, which could provide evidence for revealing whether there were differences in the genetic basis of inducing physiological perturbations between moderate low temperature (MLT) and extreme low temperature (ELT). Results The detection of physiological indices under diverse degrees of chilling stress showed similar patterns of alteration. Enhanced accumulation of osmoregulatory substances, such as soluble sugar and soluble protein, were more conducive under ELT compared to MLT in P. catalpifolia. Moreover, we observed leaf wilting symptoms distinctly after exposure to ELT for 48 h, while this effect was not obvious after MLT exposure for 48 h. Comparative transcriptomic analysis between MLT and ELT demonstrated 13,688 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), most of them appeared after 12 h and 48 h of treatment. GO and KEGG analyses elucidated prominent enrichment in aromatic-L-amino-acid decarboxylase activity term and carbohydrate metabolism pathways. Therefore, it was speculated that the DEGs involved in the above processes might be related to the difference in the contents of soluble protein and soluble sugar between MLT and ELT. Time series clustering analyses further highlighted several key genes engaged in the 'Glycosyltransferases', 'Galactose metabolism' and 'Starch and sucrose metabolism' pathways as well as the 'tyrosine decarboxylase activity' term. For instance, cellulose synthase-like A (CLSA2/9), raffinose synthase (RafS2), beta-amylase (BAM1) and tyrosine/DOPA decarboxylase (TYDC1/2/5) genes, diverging in their expression trends between MLT and ELT, might significantly affect the soluble sugar and soluble protein abundance within P. catalpifolia. Conclusion Between MLT and ELT treatments, partial overlaps in response pathways of P. catalpifolia were identified, while several genes regulating the accumulation of osmotic adjustment substances had disparate expression patterns. These findings could provide a novel physiological and molecular perspective for P. catalpifolia to adapt to complex low temperature habitats.
BackgroundElucidating the genetic variation underlying phenotypic diversity will facilitate improving production performance in livestock species. The Tibetan sheep breed in China holds significant historical importance, serving as a fundamental pillar of Qinghai's animal husbandry sector. The Plateau-type Tibetan sheep, comprising 90% of the province's population, are characterized by their tall stature and serve as the primary breed among Tibetan sheep. In contrast, Zhashijia sheep exhibit larger size and superior meat quality. These two species provide an excellent model for elucidating the genetic basis of body size variation. Therefore, this study aims to conduct a comprehensive genome-wide association study on these two Tibetan sheep breeds to identify single nucleotide polymorphism loci and regulatory genes that influence body size traits in Tibetan sheep.ResultIn this study, the phenotypic traits of body weight, body length, body height, chest circumference, chest depth, chest width, waist angle width, and pipe circumference were evaluated in two Tibetan sheep breeds: Plateau-type sheep and Zhashijia Tibetan sheep. Whole genome sequencing generated 48,215,130 high-quality SNPs for genome-wide association study. Four methods were applied and identified 623 SNPs significantly associated with body size traits. The significantly associated single nucleotide polymorphisms identified in this study are located near or within 111 candidate genes. These genes exhibit enrichment in the cAMP and Rap1 signaling pathways, significantly affecting animal growth, and body size. Specifically, the following genes were associated: ASAP1, CDK6, FRYL, NAV2, PTPRM, GPC6, PTPRG, KANK1, NTRK2 and ADCY8.ConclusionBy genome-wide association study, we identified 16 SNPs and 10 candidate genes associated with body size traits in Tibetan sheep, which hold potential for application in genomic selection breeding programs in sheep. Identifying these candidate genes will establish a solid foundation for applying molecular marker-assisted selection in sheep breeding and improve our understanding of body size control in farmed animals.
Background Theaceae, comprising 300 + species, holds significance in biodiversity, economics, and culture, notably including the globally consumed tea plant. Stewartia gemmata, a species of the earliest diverging tribe Stewartieae, is critical to offer insights into Theaceae's origin and evolutionary history. Result We sequenced the complete organelle genomes of Stewartia gemmata using short/long reads sequencing technologies. The chloroplast genome (158,406 bp) exhibited a quadripartite structure including the large single-copy region (LSC), a small single-copy region (SSC), and a pair of inverted repeat regions (IRs); 114 genes encoded 80 proteins, 30 tRNAs, and four rRNAs. The mitochondrial genome (681,203 bp) exhibited alternative conformations alongside a monocyclic structure: 61 genes encoding 38 proteins, 20 tRNAs, three rRNAs, and RNA editing-impacting genes, including ATP6, RPL16, COX2, NAD4L, NAD5, NAD7, and RPS1. Comparative analyses revealed frequent recombination events and apparent rRNA gene gains and losses in the mitochondrial genome of Theaceae. In organelle genomes, the protein-coding genes exhibited a strong A/U bias at codon endings; ENC-GC3 analysis implies selection-driven codon bias. Transposable elements might facilitate interorganelle sequence transfer. Phylogenetic analysis confirmed Stewartieae's early divergence within Theaceae, shedding light on organelle genome characteristics and evolution in Theaceae. Conclusions We studied the detailed characterization of organelle genomes, including genome structure, composition, and repeated sequences, along with the identification of lateral gene transfer (LGT) events and complexities. The discovery of a large number of repetitive sequences and simple sequence repeats (SSRs) has led to new insights into molecular phylogenetic markers. Decoding the Stewartia gemmata organellar genome provides valuable genomic resources for further studies in tea plant phylogenomics and evolutionary biology.
BackgroundCopy number alteration (CNA) is one of the major genomic variations that frequently occur in cancers, and accurate inference of CNAs is essential for unmasking intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) and tumor evolutionary history. Single-cell DNA sequencing (scDNA-seq) makes it convenient to profile CNAs at single-cell resolution, and thus aids in better characterization of ITH. Despite that several computational methods have been proposed to decipher single-cell CNAs, their performance is limited in either breakpoint detection or copy number estimation due to the high dimensionality and noisy nature of read counts data.ResultsBy treating breakpoint detection as a process to segment high dimensional read count sequence, we develop a novel method called DeepCNA for cross-cell segmentation of read count sequence and per-cell inference of CNAs. To cope with the difficulty of segmentation, an autoencoder (AE) network is employed in DeepCNA to project the original data into a low-dimensional space, where the breakpoints can be efficiently detected along each latent dimension and further merged to obtain the final breakpoints. Unlike the existing methods that manually calculate certain statistics of read counts to find breakpoints, the AE model makes it convenient to automatically learn the representations. Based on the inferred breakpoints, we employ a mixture model to predict copy numbers of segments for each cell, and leverage expectation-maximization algorithm to efficiently estimate cell ploidy by exploring the most abundant copy number state. Benchmarking results on simulated and real data demonstrate our method is able to accurately infer breakpoints as well as absolute copy numbers and surpasses the existing methods under different test conditions. DeepCNA can be accessed at: https://github.com/zhyu-lab/deepcna.ConclusionsProfiling single-cell CNAs based on deep learning is becoming a new paradigm of scDNA-seq data analysis, and DeepCNA is an enhancement to the current arsenal of computational methods for investigating cancer genomics.
Background Alfin-like proteins are a kind of plant-specific transcription factors, and play vital roles in plant growth, development and stress responses. Results In this study, a total of 27 Alfin-like transcription factors were identified in wheat. TaAL genes were unevenly distributed on chromosome. Phylogenetic analysis showed TaAL genes were divided into AL-B and AL-C subfamilies, and TaALs with closer evolutionary relationships generally shared more similar exon-intron structures and conserved motifs. The cis-acting element analysis showed MBS, ABRE and CGTCA-motif were the most common in TaAL promoters. The interacting proteins and downstream target genes of TaAL genes were also investigated in wheat. The transcriptome data and real-time PCR results indicated TaAL genes were differentially expressed under drought and salt stresses, and TaAL1-B was significantly up-regulated in response to drought stress. In addition, association analysis revealed that TaAL1-B-Hap-I allelic variation had significantly higher survival rate compared to TaAL1-B-Hap-II under drought stress. Conclusions These results will provide vital information to increase our understanding of the Alfin-like gene family in wheat, and help us in breeding better wheat varieties in the future.
Background Lotus (Nelumbo nucifera G.) is an important aquatic plant with high ornamental, economic, cultural and ecological values, but abiotic stresses seriously affect its growth and distribution. Q-type C2H2 zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) play an important role in plant growth development and environmental stress responses. Although the Q-type C2H2 gene family has been identified in some plants, limited reports has been carried out it in lotus. Results In this study, we identified 45 Q-type NnZFP members in lotus. Based on the phylogenetic tree, these Q-type NnZFP gene family members were divided into 4 groups, including C1-1i, C1-2i, C1-3i and C1-4i. Promoter cis-acting elements analysis indicated that most Q-type NnZFP gene family members in lotus were associated with response to abiotic stresses. Through collinearity analyses, no tandem duplication gene pairs and 14 segmental duplication gene pairs were identified, which showed that duplication events might play a key role in the expansion of the Q-type NnZFP gene family. The synteny results suggested that 54 and 28 Q-type NnZFP genes were orthologous to Arabidopsis and rice, respectively. The expression patterns of these Q-type NnZFP genes revealed that 30 Q-type NnZFP genes were expressed in at least one lotus tissue. Nn5g30550 showed relatively higher expression levels in all tested tissues. 12 genes were randomly selected with at least one gene from each phylogenetic clade, and the expression of these selected genes were confirmed by qRT-PCR (quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction). The results indicated that Q-type NnZFP genes were extensively involved in cadmium, drought, salt and cold stresses responses. Among them, 11 genes responded to at least three different stress treatments, especially Nn2g12894, which induced by all four treatments. Conclusions These results could increase our understanding of the characterization of the Q-type NnZFP gene family and provide relevant information for further functional analysis of Q-type NnZFP genes in plant development, and abiotic stress tolerance in lotus.
Background Pod shell thickness (PST) is an important agronomic trait of peanut because it affects the ability of shells to resist pest infestations and pathogen attacks, while also influencing the peanut shelling process. However, very few studies have explored the genetic basis of PST.Results An F2 segregating population derived from a cross between the thick-shelled cultivar Yueyou 18 (YY18) and the thin-shelled cultivar Weihua 8 (WH8) was used to identify the quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for PST. On the basis of a bulked segregant analysis sequencing (BSA-seq), four QTLs were preliminarily mapped to chromosomes 3, 8, 13, and 18. Using the genome resequencing data of YY18 and WH8, 22 kompetitive allele-specific PCR (KASP) markers were designed for the genotyping of the F2 population. Two major QTLs (qPSTA08 and qPSTA18) were identified and finely mapped, with qPSTA08 detected on chromosome 8 (0.69-Mb physical genomic region) and qPSTA18 detected on chromosome 18 (0.15-Mb physical genomic region). Moreover, qPSTA08 and qPSTA18 explained 31.1-32.3% and 16.7-16.8% of the phenotypic variation, respectively. Fifteen genes were detected in the two candidate regions, including three genes with nonsynonymous mutations in the exon region. Two molecular markers (Tif2_A08_31713024 and Tif2_A18_7198124) that were developed for the two major QTL regions effectively distinguished between thick-shelled and thin-shelled materials. Subsequently, the two markers were validated in four F2:3 lines selected.Conclusions The QTLs identified and molecular markers developed in this study may lay the foundation for breeding cultivars with a shell thickness suitable for mechanized peanut shelling.
BackgroundB3 genes encode transcription factors that play key roles in plant growth and development. However, the specific B3 genes involved in the seed development of Akebia trifoliata remain unexplored.ResultsA total of 72 AktB3 genes were identified and classified into five subfamilies (ARF, LAV, RAV, HSI, and REM) based on phylogenetic analysis. These 72 AktB3 genes were unevenly distributed across 16 chromosomes. Collinear analysis indicated that segmental duplication has played a significant role in the evolution of AktB3 genes, and underwent purification selection. Expression profiling across seed development stages revealed that seven AktB3 genes, particularly from the LAV subfamily (AktABI3, AktFUS3, AktLEC2), were up-regulated at 70 days after flowering (DAF). Notably, the expression of oleosin exhibited a strong positive correlation with LAV subfamily genes, highlighting their potential roles as hub genes in lipid metabolism and seed development. Yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) and yeast one-hybrid (Y1H) experiments confirmed that AktFUS3-1, AktFUS3-2, and AktLEC2 form protein complexes and individually bind to the AktOLE1 promoter, thereby regulating downstream gene expression. These results provide direct evidence of the cooperative role these transcription factors play in controlling lipid metabolism, particularly related to oleosin proteins. Additionally, miRNA sequencing across three seed developmental stages identified 591 miRNAs and 1,673 target gene pairs. A total of 23 AktB3 genes were predicted to be targets of 20 miRNAs, with 11 miRNAs specifically targeting the ARF subfamily genes. Particularly, miR160-x, miR160-z, and miR167-z were predicted to target ARF subfamily genes, potentially influencing seed development. Moreover, the miRNA-B3 regulatory modules, especially involving ARF genes and miR160/167, require further study to clarify their roles in seed development.ConclusionsThese findings contribute valuable resources for future functional studies of the molecular regulatory networks governing seed development in A. trifoliata.
Barkground Circular RNAs (circRNAs) play important regulatory roles in a variety of biological processes in mammals. Multiple birth-traits in goats are affected by several factors, but the expression and function of circRNAs in follicular development of goats are not clear. In this study, we aimed to investigate the possible regulatory mechanisms of circRNA and collected five groups of large follicles (Follicle diameter > 6 mm) and small follicles (1 mm < Follicle diameter < 3 mm) from Leizhou goats in estrus for RNA sequencing. Results RNA sequencing showed that 152 circRNAs were differentially expressed in small and large follicles. Among them, 101 circRNAs were up-regulated in large follicles and 51 circRNAs were up-regulated in small follicles. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses showed that parental genes of the differential circRNAs were significantly enriched in important pathways, such as ovarian steroidogenesis, GnRH signaling pathway, animal autophagy and oxytocin signalling pathway. BioSignal analysis revealed that 152 differentially expressed circRNAs could target 91 differential miRNAs including miR-101 family (chi-miR-101-3p, chi-miR-101-5p), miR-202 family (chi-miR-202-5p, chi-miR-202-3p),60 circRNAs with translation potential. Based on the predicted sequencing results, the ceRNA networks chicirc_008762/chi-miR-338-3p/ARHGAP18 and chicirc_040444/chi-miR-338-3p/STAR were constructed in this study. Importantly, the new gene circCFAP20DC was first discovered in goats. The EDU assay and flow cytometry results indicated that circCFAP20DC enhanced the proliferation of follicular granulosa cells(GCs). Real-time quantitative PCR and western blotting assays showed that circCFAP20DC activated the Retinoblastoma(RB) pathway and promoted the progression of granulosa cells from G1 to S phase. Conclusion Differential circRNAs in goat size follicles may have important biological functions for follicular development. The novel gene circCFAP20DC activates the RB pathway, promoting the progression of GCs from G1 to S phase. This, in turn, enhances the proliferation of follicular GCs in goats.
Background The sucrose nonfermenting-1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) plays a crucial role in responses to diverse biotic/abiotic stresses. Currently, there are reports on these genes in Haynaldia villosa, a diploid wild relative of wheat. Results To understand the evolution of SnRK2-V family genes and their roles in various stress conditions, we performed genome-wide identification of the SnRK2-V gene family in H. villosa. Ten SnRK2-V genes were identified and characterized for their structures, functions and spatial expressions. Analysis of gene exon/intron structure further revealed the presence of evolutionary paths and replication events of SnRK2-V gene family in the H. villosa. In addition, the features of gene structure, the chromosomal location, subcellular localization of the gene family were investigated and the phylogenetic relationship were determined using computational approaches. Analysis of cis-regulatory elements of SnRK2-V gene members revealed their close correlation with different phytohormone signals. The expression profiling revealed that ten SnRK2-V genes expressed at least one tissue (leave, stem, root, or grain), or in response to at least one of the biotic (stripe rust or powdery mildew) or abiotic (drought or salt) stresses. Moreover, SnRK2.9-V was up-regulated in H. villosa under the drought and salt stress and overexpressing of SnRK2.9-V in wheat enhanced drought and salt tolerances via enhancing the genes expression of antioxidant enzymes, revealing a potential value of SnRK2.9-V in wheat improvement for salt tolerance. Conclusion Our present study provides a basic genome-wide overview of SnRK2-V genes in H. villosa and demonstrates the potential use of SnRK2.9-V in enhancing the drought and salt tolerances in common wheat.
Background The cation/proton antiporter (CPA) superfamily plays a crucial role in regulating ion homeostasis and pH in plant cells, contributing to stress resistance. However, in potato (Solanum tuberosum L.), systematic identification and analysis of CPA genes are lacking. Results A total of 33 StCPA members were identified and classified into StNHX (n = 7), StKEA (n = 6), and StCHX (n = 20) subfamilies. StCHX owned the highest number of conserved motifs, followed by StKEA and StNHX. The StNHX and StKEA subfamilies owned more exons than StCHX. NaCl stress induced the differentially expression of 19 genes in roots or leaves, among which StCHX14 and StCHX16 were specifically induced in leaves, while StCHX2 and StCHX19 were specifically expressed in the roots. A total of 11 strongly responded genes were further verified by qPCR. Six CPA family members, StNHX1, StNHX2, StNHX3, StNHX5, StNHX6 and StCHX19, were proved to transport Na+ through yeast complementation experiments. Conclusions This study provides comprehensive insights into StCPAs and their response to NaCl stress, facilitating further functional characterization.
Shepherd's crook (Geodorum) is a genus of protected orchids that are valuable both medicinally and ornamentally. Geodorum eulophioides (GE) is an endangered and narrowly distributed species, and Geodorum densiflorum (GD) and Geodorum attenuatum (GA) are widespread species. The growth of orchids depend on microorganisms. However, there are few studies on the microbial structure in Geodorum, and little is known about the roles of microorganisms in the endangered mechanism of G. eulophioides. This study analyzed the structure and composition of bacterial and fungal communities in the roots and rhizosphere soil of GE, GD, and GA. The results showed that Delftia, Bordetella and norank_f_Xanthobacteraceae were the dominant bacteria in the roots of Geodorum, while norank_f_Xanthobacteraceae, Gaiella and norank_f_norank_o_Gaiellales were the dominant bacteria in the rhizosphere soil of Geodorum. In the roots, the proportion of Mycobacterium in GD_roadside was higher than that in GD_understory, on the contrary, the proportion of Fusarium, Delftia and Bordetella in GD_roadside was lower than that in GD_understory. Compared with the GD_understory, the roots of GD_roadside had lower microbial diversity. In the endangered species GE, Russula was the primary fungus in the roots and rhizosphere soil, with fungal diversity lower than in the more widespread species. Among the widespread species, the dominant fungal genera in the roots and rhizosphere soil were Neocosmospora, Fusarium and Coprinopsis. This study enhances our understanding of microbial composition and diversity, providing fundamental information for future research on microbial contributions to plant growth and ecosystem function in Geodorum.
BackgroundLeucine-rich repeat (LRR) extensins (LRXs), which are cell wall-localized chimeric extensin proteins, are essential for the development of plants and their resistance to stress. Despite the significance of these genes, an extensive genome-wide analysis of the LRX gene family in grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) is lacking.ResultsWe here detected 14 grapevine LRX genes and classified them into four groups through phylogenetic analysis. Then, their physiological and biochemical properties and gene/protein structures were analyzed. According to synteny analysis, tandem and segmental duplications have appreciably affected the expansion of the grapevine LRX gene family. On investigating tissue-specific expression profiles and cis-regulatory elements, we observed that VvLRXs likely serve as regulators of both the growth of grapevines and their responses to various environmental stresses. Salt stress treatments induced the expression of several VvLRXs, and VvLRX7 expression was the most significantly upregulated. Furthermore, VvLRX7 expression was positively correlated with the salt tolerance of grape rootstocks. VvLRX7 overexpression in Arabidopsis markedly enhanced its salt tolerance.ConclusionThis study provides a general understanding of the characteristics and evolution of the LRX gene family in grapevine. VvLRX7 may function as a positive regulator of plant's response to salt stress. These findings offer a basis for future studies on the function of grapevine LRXs and their role in improving salt stress tolerance in grapevine.
BackgroundLung cancer is a heterogeneous disease and the primary cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Somatic mutations, including large structural variants, are important biomarkers in lung cancer for selecting targeted therapy. Genomic studies in lung cancer have been conducted using short-read sequencing. Emerging long-read sequencing technologies are a promising alternative to study somatic structural variants, however there is no current consensus on how to process data and call somatic events. In this study, we preformed whole genome sequencing of lung cancer and matched non-tumour samples using long and short read sequencing to comprehensively benchmark three sequence aligners and seven structural variant callers comprised of generic callers (SVIM, Sniffles2, DELLY in generic mode and cuteSV) and somatic callers (Severus, SAVANA, nanomonsv and DELLY in somatic modes).ResultsDifferent combinations of aligners and variant callers influenced somatic structural variant detection. The choice of caller had a significant influence on somatic structural variant detection in terms of variant type, size, sensitivity, and accuracy. The performance of each variant caller was assessed by comparing to somatic structural variants identified by short-read sequencing. When compared to somatic structural variants detected with short-read sequencing, more events were detected with long-read sequencing. The mean recall of somatic variant events identified by long-read sequencing was higher for the somatic callers (72%) than generic callers (53%). Among the somatic callers when using the minimap2 aligner, SAVANA and Severus achieved the highest recall at 79.5% and 79.25% respectively, followed by nanomonsv with a recall of 72.5%.ConclusionLong-read sequencing can identify somatic structural variants in clincal samples. The longer reads have the potential to improve our understanding of cancer development and inform personalized cancer treatment.
Background Jasmonate (JA) is the important phytohormone to regulate plant growth and adaption to stress signals. MYC2, an bHLH transcription factor, is the master regulator of JA signaling. Although MYC2 in maize has been identified, its function remains to be clarified. Results To understand the function and regulatory mechanism of MYC2 in maize, the joint analysis of DAP-seq and RNA-seq is conducted to identify the binding sites and target genes of ZmMYC2. A total of 3183 genes are detected both in DAP-seq and RNA-seq data, potentially as the directly regulating genes of ZmMYC2. These genes are involved in various biological processes including plant growth and stress response. Besides the classic cis-elements like the G-box and E-box that are bound by MYC2, some new motifs are also revealed to be recognized by ZmMYC2, such as nGCATGCAnn, AAAAAAAA, CACGTGCGTGCG. The binding sites of many ZmMYC2 regulating genes are identified by IGV-sRNA. Conclusions All together, abundant target genes of ZmMYC2 are characterized with their binding sites, providing the basis to construct the regulatory network of ZmMYC2 and better understanding for JA signaling in maize.
Huntington's disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder featured by abnormal movements, arising from the extensive neuronal loss and glial dysfunction in the striatum. Although the causes and pathogenetic mechanisms of HD are well established, the development of disease-modifying pharmacological therapies for HD remains a formidable challenge. Laduviglusib has demonstrated neuroprotective effects through the enhancement of mitochondrial function in the striatum of HD animal models. Ferroptosis is a nonapoptotic form of cell death that occurs as a consequence of lethal iron-dependent lipid peroxidation and mitochondrial dysfunction. However, the ferroptosis-related mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective effects of laduviglusib in the striatum of HD patients remain largely uncharted. In this study, we leveraged single-nucleus RNA sequencing data obtained from the striatum of HD patients in stages 2-4 to identify differentially expressed genes within distinct cell-type. We subsequently integrated these differentially expressed genes of HD, laduviglusib target genes and ferroptosis-related genes to predict the ferroptosis-related mechanisms underpinning the neuroprotective effects of laduviglusib in HD patients. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) analyses unveiled that the effects of laduviglusib on direct pathway striatal projection neurons (dSPNs) is mainly associated with Th17 cell differentiation pathways. Conversely, its impact on indirect pathway striatal projection neurons (iSPNs) extends to the Neurotrophin signaling pathway, FoxO signaling pathway, and reactive oxygen species pathway. In microglia, laduviglusib appears to contribute to HD pathology via mechanisms related to Th17 cell differentiation and the FoxO signaling pathway. Further, molecular docking results indicated favorable binding of laduviglusib with PARP1 (associated with dSPNs and iSPNs), SCD (associated with astrocytes), ALOX5 (associated with microglia), and HIF1A (associated with dSPNs, iSPNs, and microglia). In addition, the KEGG results suggest that laduviglusib may enhance mitochondrial function and protect against neuronal loss by targeting ferroptosis-related signaling pathways, particularly mediated by ALOX5 in microglia. These findings provide valuable insights into the potential mechanisms through which laduviglusib exerts its effects on distinct cell-types within the HD striatum.
Graph-based pangenome is gaining more popularity than linear pangenome because it stores more comprehensive information of variations. However, traditional linear genome browser has its own advantages, especially the tremendous resources accumulated historically. With the fast-growing number of individual genomes and their annotations available, the demand for a genome browser to visualize genome annotation for many individuals together with a graph-based pangenome is getting higher and higher. Here we report a new pangenome browser PPanG, a precise pangenome browser enabling nucleotide-level comparison of individual genome annotations together with a graph-based pangenome. Nine rice genomes with annotations were provided by default as potential references, and any individual genome can be selected as the reference. Our pangenome browser provides unprecedented insights on genome variations at different levels from base to gene, and reveals how the structures of a gene could differ for individuals. PPanG can be applied to any species with multiple individual genomes available and it is available at https://cgm.sjtu.edu.cn/PPanG.
Background Plant compactness (PC) is a crucial agronomic trait that affects plant density in wheat, which in turn influences biomass and grain yield potential. The canopy of high-yielding wheat varieties should exhibit appropriate aboveground plant architecture. In this study, three recombinant inbred line (RIL) populations were generated to identify and validate quantitative trait loci (QTL) related to plant compactness. The erect and compact tillering genotype SN05525 was used as a common parent. A total of 193 F8 RILs from the cross SN05525/SN22 were genotyped using the high-density Illumina iSelect 90 K single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) assay. Results A linkage map with 7180 SNP loci was constructed, revealing six QTL on chromosomes 3B (Qpc.sdau-3B.1, Qpc.sdau-3B.2),5B (Qpc.sdau-5B), 5D (Qpc.sdau-5D), 2 A (Qpc.sdau-2 A), and 7 A (Qpc.sdau-7 A) that control compact tillers. Qpc.sdau-3B.1, Qpc.sdau-5D, and Qpc.sdau-5B accounted for up to 16.70%, 16.89%, and 14.56% of the phenotypic variance, respectively. Kompetitive allele-specific PCR (KASP) markers were developed for these QTL, and their effects were validated in two additional RIL populations, SN05525/Luyuan 502 and SN05525/Xinong 511. Significant effects of Qpc.sdau-3B.1 and Qpc.sdau-5D on compactness were observed in the validation populations. Conclusion Three major QTL loci closely related to plant compactness in wheat were successfully identified, and their effects were validated in two additional RIL populations across multi environments. Plant architecture plays a crucial role in enhancing yield and economic value in wheat. In the process of molecular marker-assisted selection breeding, the closely linked KASP markers could potentially be utilized in molecular marker-assisted selection for adjusting plant compactness and for further characterization of the underlying gene(s).
BackgroundMesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent stem cells that are under investigation for use in clinical trials because they are capable of self-renewal and differentiating into different cell types under defined conditions. Nonetheless, the therapeutic effects of MSCs have been constrained by low engraftment rates, cell fusion, and cell survival. Various strategies have been explored to improve the therapeutic efficacy of MSCs, with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB emerging as a promising candidate. To enhance our comprehension of the impact of PDGF-BB on the gene expression profile and chromosomal accessibility of MSCs, RNA-sequencing and analysis of chromatin accessibility profiles were conducted on three human primary MSCs in culture, both with and without stimulation by PDGF-BB.ResultsIntegrative analysis of gene expression and chromatin accessibility demonstrated that PDGF-BB treatment modified the chromatin accessibility landscape, marking regions for activation or repression through the AP-1 family transcription factors TEAD, CEBP, and RUNX2. These changes in AP-1 transcription factor expression, in turn, led to cell proliferation and differentiation potential towards osteoblasts, adipocytes, or chondrocytes. The degree of MSC differentiation varies among cells isolated from different donors. The presence of an enrichment of exosome-related genes is also noted among all the differentially expressed genes.ConclusionsIn conclusion, the observed changes in AP-1 transcription factor expression not only induced cellular proliferation and differentiation, but also revealed variations in the degree of MSC differentiation based on donor-specific differences. Moreover, the enrichment of exosome-related genes among differentially expressed genes suggests a potential significant role for PDGF-BB in facilitating intercellular communication.
BackgroundDNA sequencing is a critical tool in modern biology. Over the last two decades, it has been revolutionized by the advent of massively parallel sequencing, leading to significant advances in the genome and transcriptome sequencing of various organisms. Nevertheless, challenges with accuracy, lack of competitive options and prohibitive costs associated with high throughput parallel short-read sequencing persist.ResultsHere, we conduct a comparative analysis using matched DNA and RNA short-reads assays between Element Biosciences' AVITI and Illumina's NextSeq 550 chemistries. Similar comparisons were evaluated for synthetic long-read sequencing for RNA and targeted single-cell transcripts between the AVITI and Illumina's NovaSeq 6000. For both DNA and RNA short-read applications, the study found that the AVITI produced significantly higher per sequence quality scores. For PCR-free DNA libraries, we observed an average 89.7% lower experimentally determined error rate when using the AVITI chemistry, compared to the NextSeq 550. For short-read RNA quantification, AVITI platform had an average of 32.5% lower error rate than that for NextSeq 550. With regards to synthetic long-read mRNA and targeted synthetic long read single cell mRNA sequencing, both platforms' respective chemistries performed comparably in quantification of genes and isoforms. The AVITI displayed a marginally lower error rate for long reads, with fewer chemistry-specific errors and a higher mutation detection rate.ConclusionThese results point to the potential of the AVITI platform as a competitive candidate in high-throughput short read sequencing analyses when juxtaposed with the Illumina NextSeq 550.
Plant U-box genes play an important role in the regulation of plant hormone signal transduction, stress tolerance, and pathogen resistance; however, their functions in coffee (Coffea canephora L.) remain largely unexplored. In this study, we identified 47 CcPUB genes in the C. canephora L. genome, clustering them into nine groups via phylogenetic tree. The CcPUB genes were unevenly distributed across the 11 chromosomes of C. canephora L., with the majority (11) on chromosome 2 and none on chromosome 8. The cis-acting elements analysis showed that CcPUB genes were involved in abiotic and biotic stresses, phytohormone responsive, and plant growth and development. RNA-seq data revealed diverse expression patterns of CcPUB genes across leaves, stems, and fruits tissues. qRT-PCR analyses under dehydration, low temperature, SA, and Colletotrichum stresses showed significant up-regulation of CcPUB2, CcPUB24, CcPUB34, and CcPUB40 in leaves. Furthermore, subcellular localization showed CcPUB2 and CcPUB34 were located in the plasma membrane and nucleus, and CcPUB24 and CcPUB40 were located in the nucleus. This study provides valuable insights into the roles of PUB genes in stress responses and phytohormone signaling in C. canephora L., and provided basis for functional characterization of PUB genes in C. canephora L.
Background Iron deficiency (ID) during the fetal-neonatal period results in long-term neurodevelopmental impairments associated with pervasive hippocampal gene dysregulation. Prenatal choline supplementation partially normalizes these effects, suggesting an interaction between iron and choline in hippocampal transcriptome regulation. To understand the regulatory mechanisms, we investigated epigenetic marks of genes with altered chromatin accessibility (ATAC-seq) or poised to be repressed (H3K9me3 ChIP-seq) in iron-repleted adult rats having experienced fetal-neonatal ID exposure with or without prenatal choline supplementation.Results Fetal-neonatal ID was induced by limiting maternal iron intake from gestational day (G) 2 through postnatal day (P) 7. Half of the pregnant dams were given supplemental choline (5.0 g/kg) from G11-18. This resulted in 4 groups at P65 (Iron-sufficient [IS], Formerly Iron-deficient [FID], IS with choline [ISch], and FID with choline [FIDch]). Hippocampi were collected from P65 iron-repleted male offspring and analyzed for chromatin accessibility and H3K9me3 enrichment. 22% and 24% of differentially transcribed genes in FID- and FIDch-groups, respectively, exhibited significant differences in chromatin accessibility, whereas 1.7% and 13% exhibited significant differences in H3K9me3 enrichment. These changes mapped onto gene networks regulating synaptic plasticity, neuroinflammation, and reward circuits. Motif analysis of differentially modified genomic sites revealed significantly stronger choline effects than early-life ID and identified multiple epigenetically modified transcription factor binding sites.Conclusions This study reveals genome-wide, stable epigenetic changes and epigenetically modifiable gene networks associated with specific chromatin marks in the hippocampus, and lays a foundation to further elucidate iron-dependent epigenetic mechanisms that underlie the long-term effects of fetal-neonatal ID, choline, and their interactions.
BackgroundArgonaute (AGO), Dicer-like (DCL), and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RDR) are essential components of RNA silencing pathways in plants. These components are crucial for the generation and regulatory functions of small RNAs, especially in plant development and response to environmental stresses. Despite their well-characterized functions in other plant species, there is limited information about these genes and their stress responses in centipedegrass (Eremochloa ophiuroides), a key turfgrass species.ResultsUsing genome-wide analysis we identified 20 AGO, 6 DCL, and 10 RDR members in centipedegrass and provided a comprehensive overview of their characteristics. We performed the chromosomal location, gene duplication, syntenic analysis, conserve motif, gene structure, and cis-acting elements analysis. And conducted phylogenetic analyses to clarify the evolutionary relationships among the EoAGO, EoDCL, and EoRDR gene families. Three-dimensional modeling prediction of EoAGO, EoDCL, and EoRDR proteins supported the phylogenetic classification. Furthermore, we examined the expression patterns of these genes in different tissues (spike, stem, leaf, root, and flower) and under different stress conditions (cold, salt, drought, aluminum, and herbicide) using RT-qPCR. The results revealed that most of EoAGO, EoDCL, and EoRDR genes were upregulated in response to multiple abiotic stresses, while some exhibited unique responses, suggesting potential specialized regulatory functions.ConclusionIn this study, we performed a comprehensive genome-wide identification, and phylogenetic and expression pattern analyses of the EoAGO, EoDCL and EoRDR gene families. Our analysis provides a foundation for future research on the RNA silence elements of turfgrass, and affords scientific basis and insights for clarifying the expression patterns of EoAGO, EoDCL and EoRDR genes under adversity stress. Further functional validation and molecular breeding of these genes can be carried out for enhancing the stress resistance of centipedegrass.
Background Myelocytomatosis (MYC) transcription factors are crucial mediators of the response of plants to environmental stresses through via binding to DNA regulatory regions. However, few systematic characterizations of MYC genes are available in Cucurbitaceae species. Results In this study, we identified 10, 8, 12, and 10 MYC genes in Cucumis sativus, Cucumis melo, Citrullus lanatus, and Benincasa hispida, respectively. Characterization revealed that all of the MYC proteins contain a highly conserved H4-V5-E6-E8-R9-R11-R12 sequence, which is essential for the binding of DNA regulatory regions. Evolutionary analysis enabled us to categorize 40 predicted MYC proteins from seven species into five distinct groups and revealed that the expansion of the MYC genes occurred before the divergence of monocots and dicots. The upstream promoter regions of the MYC genes contain a variety of developmental, stress, and hormone-responsive regulatory elements. The expression of cucumber MYC genes varies significantly across organs, with particularly high expression of CsaV3_3G001710 observed across all organs. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that certain cucumber MYC genes undergo specific upregulation or downregulation in response to both biotic and abiotic stressors. In particular, under temperature stress, the cucumber genes CsaV3_3G007980 and CsaV3_3G001710 were significantly upregulated. Interestingly, the homologs of these two genes in C. lanatus presented a similar expression pattern to that in C. sativus, whereas in B. hispida, they presented the opposite pattern, i.e., significant downregulation. These findings indicated that these two genes indeed respond to temperature stress but with different expression patterns, highlighting the divergent functions of homologous genes across different species. Conclusions This study analyzed the size and composition of the MYC gene family in four Cucurbitaceae species and investigated stress-responsive expression profiles, especially under temperature stress. All the results showed that MYC genes play important roles in development and stress responses, laying a theoretical foundation for further investigations of these response mechanisms.
Background As a key regulatory enzyme in the glycolysis pathway, pyruvate kinase (PK) plays crucial roles in multiple physiological processes during plant growth and is also involved in the abiotic stress response. However, little information is known about PKs in soybean. Results In this study, we identified 27 PK family genes against the genome of soybean cultivar Zhonghuang13. They were classified into 2 subfamilies including PKc and PKp. 22 segmental duplicated gene pairs and 1 tandem duplicated gene pair were identified and all of them experienced a strong purifying selective pressure during evolution. Furthermore, the abiotic stresses (especially salt stress) and hormone responsive cis-elements were present in the promoters of GmPK genes, suggesting their potential roles in abiotic stress tolerance. By performing the qRT-PCR, 6 GmPK genes that continuously respond to both NaCl and ABA were identified. Subsequently, GmPK21, which represented the most significant change under NaCl treatment was chosen for further study. Its encoded protein GmPK21 was localized in the cytoplasm and plasma membrane. The transgenic Arabidopsis overexpressing GmPK21 exhibited weakened salinity tolerance. Conclusions This study provides genomic information of soybean PK genes and a molecular basis for mining salt tolerance function of PKs in the future.
BackgroundPenicillium chrysogenum is a filamentous fungal species with diverse habitats, yet little is known about its genetics in adapting to extreme subseafloor sedimental environments.ResultsHere, we report the discovery of P. chrysogenum strain 28R-6-F01, isolated from deep coal-bearing sediments 2306 m beneath the seafloor. This strain possesses exceptional characteristics, including the ability to thrive in extreme conditions such as high temperature (45 degree celsius), high pressure (35 Mpa), and anaerobic environments, and exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity, producing the antibiotic penicillin at a concentration of 358 mu g/mL. Genome sequencing and assembly revealed a genome size of 33.19 Mb with a GC content of 48.84%, containing 6959 coding genes. Comparative analysis with eight terrestrial strains identified 88 unique genes primarily associated with penicillin and aflatoxins biosynthesis, carbohydrate degradation, viral resistance, and three secondary metabolism gene clusters. Furthermore, significant expansions in gene families related to DNA repair were observed, likely linked to the strain's adaptation to its environmental niche.ConclusionsOur findings provide insights into the genomic and biological characteristics of P. chrysogenum adaptation to extreme anaerobic subseafloor sedimentary environments, such as high temperature and pressure.
BackgroundPruning is an important cultivation management option that has important effects on peach yield and quality. However, the effects of pruning on the overall genetic and metabolic changes in peach leaves and fruits are poorly understood.ResultsThe transcriptomic and metabolomic profiles of leaves and fruits from trees subjected to pruning and unpruning treatments were measured. A total of 20,633 genes and 622 metabolites were detected. Compared with those in the control, 1,127 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 77 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) were identified in leaves from pruned and unpruned trees (pdLvsupdL), whereas 423 DEGs and 29 DEMs were identified in fruits from the pairwise comparison pdFvsupdF. The content of three auxin analogues was upregulated in the leaves of pruned trees, the content of all flavonoids detected in the leaves decreased, and the expression of almost all genes involved in the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway decreased. The phenolic acid and amino acid metabolites detected in fruits from pruned trees were downregulated, and all terpenoids were upregulated. The correlation analysis revealed that DEGs and DEMs in leaves were enriched in tryptophan metabolism, auxin signal transduction, and flavonoid biosynthesis. DEGs and DEMs in fruits were enriched in flavonoid and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, as well as L-glutamic acid biosynthesis.ConclusionsPruning has different effects on the leaves and fruits of peach trees, affecting mainly the secondary metabolism and hormone signalling pathways in leaves and amino acid biosynthesis in fruits.
Background The Synotis (C. B. Clarke) C. Jeffrey & Y. L. Chen is an ecologically important genus of the tribe Senecioneae, family Asteraceae. Because most species of the genus bear similar morphology, traditional morphological identification methods are very difficult to discriminate them. Therefore, it is essential to develop a reliable and effective identification method for Synotis species. In this study, the complete chloroplast (cp.) genomes of four Synotis species, S. cavaleriei (H.L & eacute;v.) C. Jeffrey & Y.L. Chen, S. duclouxii (Dunn) C. Jeffrey & Y.L. Chen, S. nagensium (C.B. Clarke) C. Jeffrey & Y.L. Chen and S. erythropappa (Bureau & Franch.) C. Jeffrey & Y. L. Chen had been sequenced using next-generation sequencing technology and reported here. Results These four cp. genomes exhibited a typical quadripartite structure and contained the large single-copy regions (LSC, 83,288 to 83,399 bp), the small single-copy regions (SSC, 18,262 to 18,287 bp), and the inverted repeat regions (IR, 24,837 to 24,842 bp). Each of the four cp. genomes encoded 134 genes, including 87 protein-coding genes, 37 tRNA genes, 8 rRNA genes, and 2 pseudogenes (ycf1 and rps19). The highly variable regions (trnC-GCA-petN, ccsA-psaC, trnE-UUC-rpoB, ycf1, ccsA and petN) may be used as potential molecular barcodes. The complete cp. genomes sequence of Synotis could be used as the potentially effective super-barcode to accurately identify Synotis species. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the four Synotis species were clustered into a monophyletic group, and they were closed to the Senecio, Crassocephalum and Dendrosenecio in tribe Senecioneae. Conclusions This study will be useful for further species identification, evolution, genetic diversity and phylogenetic studies within this genus Synotis and the tribe Senecioneae.
Background The Asian yellow pond turtle (Mauremys mutica) is an important commercial freshwater aquaculture species in China. This species is a highly sexually dimorphic species, with males growing at a faster rate than females and exhibits temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD), in which the incubation temperature during embryonic development determines the sexual fate. However, the mechanisms of the sex determination or sex differentiation in the Asian yellow pond turtle are remain a mystery. Results Temperature-specific gonadal transcriptomics of the Asian yellow pond turtle were performed during the thermosensitive period (stage 15) using RNA-seq technology to identify candidate genes that initiate gonadal differentiation. We uncovered candidates that were the first to respond to temperature. These candidates were sexually dimorphic in expression, reflecting differences in gonadal (Cirbp, Runx1) and germline differentiation (Vasa, Nanos1, Piwil2), gametogenesis (Hmgb3, Zar1, Ovoinhibitor-like, Kif4), steroid hormone biosynthesis (Hsd17b5, Hsd17b6), heat shock (Dnajb6, Hsp90b1, Hsp90aa1) and transient receptor potential channel genes (Trpm1, Trpm4, Trpm6, Trpv1). Conclusions Our work will provide important genetic information to elucidate the mechanisms of sex control in the Asian yellow pond turtles, and will contribute important genetic resources for further studies of temperature-dependent sex determination in turtles.
Background The growth and development of organism were dependent on the effect of genetic, environment, and their interaction. In recent decades, lots of candidate additive genetic markers and genes had been detected by using genome-widely association study (GWAS). However, restricted to computing power and practical tool, the interactive effect of markers and genes were not revealed clearly. And utilization of these interactive markers is difficult in the breeding and prediction, such as genome selection (GS).Results Through the Power-FDR curve, the GbyE algorithm can detect more significant genetic loci at different levels of genetic correlation and heritability, especially at low heritability levels. The additive effect of GbyE exhibits high significance on certain chromosomes, while the interactive effect detects more significant sites on other chromosomes, which were not detected in the first two parts. In prediction accuracy testing, in most cases of heritability and genetic correlation, the majority of prediction accuracy of GbyE is significantly higher than that of the mean method, regardless of whether the rrBLUP model or BGLR model is used for statistics. The GbyE algorithm improves the prediction accuracy of the three Bayesian models BRR, BayesA, and BayesLASSO using information from genetic by environmental interaction (G x E) and increases the prediction accuracy by 9.4%, 9.1%, and 11%, respectively, relative to the Mean value method. The GbyE algorithm is significantly superior to the mean method in the absence of a single environment, regardless of the combination of heritability and genetic correlation, especially in the case of high genetic correlation and heritability.Conclusions Therefore, this study constructed a new genotype design model program (GbyE) for GWAS and GS using Kronecker product. which was able to clearly estimate the additive and interactive effects separately. The results showed that GbyE can provide higher statistical power for the GWAS and more prediction accuracy of the GS models. In addition, GbyE gives varying degrees of improvement of prediction accuracy in three Bayesian models (BRR, BayesA, and BayesCpi). Whatever the phenotype were missed in the single environment or multiple environments, the GbyE also makes better prediction for inference population set. This study helps us understand the interactive relationship between genomic and environment in the complex traits. The GbyE source code is available at the GitHub website (https://github.com/liu-xinrui/GbyE).
BackgroundCaptivity and artificial food provision are common conservation strategies for the endangered golden snub-nosed monkey (Rhinopithecus roxellana). Anthropogenic activities have been reported to impact the fitness of R. roxellana by altering their gut microbiota, a crucial indicator of animal health. Nevertheless, the degree of divergence in gut microbiota between different anthropogenically-disturbed (AD) R. roxellana and their counterparts in the wild has yet to be elucidated. Here, we conducted a comparative analysis of the gut microbiota across nine populations of R. roxellana spanning China, which included seven captive populations, one wild population, and another wild population subject to artificial food provision.ResultsBoth captivity and food provision significantly altered the gut microbiota. AD populations exhibited common variations, such as increased Bacteroidetes and decreased Firmicutes (e.g., Ruminococcus), Actinobacteria (e.g., Parvibacter), Verrucomicrobia (e.g., Akkermansia), and Tenericutes. Additionally, a reduced Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratiosuggested diminished capacity for complex carbohydrate degradation in captive individuals. The results of microbial functional prediction suggested that AD populations displayed heightened microbial genes linked to vitamin and amino acid metabolism, alongside decreased genes associated antibiotics biosynthesis (e.g., penicillin, cephalosporin, macrolides, and clavulanic acid) and secondary metabolite degradation (e.g., naphthalene and atrazine). These microbial alterations implied potential disparities in the health status between AD and wild individuals. AD populations exhibited varying degrees of microbial changes compared to the wild group, implying that the extent of these variations might serve as a metric for assessing the health status of AD populations. Furthermore, utilizing the individual information of captive individuals, we identified associations between variations in the gut microbiota of R. roxellana and host age, as well as pedigree. Older individuals exhibited higher microbial diversity, while a closer genetic relatedness reflected a more similar gut microbiota.ConclusionsOur aim was to assess how anthropogenic activities and host factors influence the gut microbiota of R. roxellana. Anthropogenic activities led to consistent changes in gut microbial diversity and function, while host age and genetic relatedness contributed to interindividual variations in the gut microbiota. These findings may contribute to the establishment of health assessment standards and the optimization of breeding conditions for captive R. roxellana populations.
Background Wheat landraces are considered a valuable source of genetic diversity for breeding programs. It is useful to evaluate the genetic diversity in breeding studies such as marker-assisted selection (MAS), genome-wide association studies (GWAS), and genomic selection. In addition, constructing a core germplasm set that represents the genetic diversity of the entire variety set is of great significance for the efficient conservation and utilization of wheat landrace germplasms. Results To understand the genetic diversity in wheat landrace, 2,023 accessions in the Jiangsu Provincial Crop Germplasm Resource Bank were used to explore the molecular diversity and population structure using the Illumina 15 K single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chip. These accessions were divided into five subpopulations based on population structure, principal coordinate and kinship analysis. A significant variation was found within and among the subpopulations based on the molecular variance analysis (AMOVA). Subpopulation 3 showed more genetic variability based on the different allelic patterns (Na, Ne and I). The M strategy as implemented in MStratv 4.1 software was used to construct the representative core collection. A core collection with a total of 311 accessions (15.37%) was selected from the entire landrace germplasm based on genotype and 12 different phenotypic traits. Compared to the initial landrace collections, the core collection displayed higher gene diversity (0.31) and polymorphism information content (PIC) (0.25), and represented almost all phenotypic variation. Conclusions A core collection comprising 311 accessions containing 100% of the genetic variation in the initial population was developed. This collection provides a germplasm base for effective management, conservation, and utilization of the variation in the original set.
Background In day-old Hungarian white goose goslings, there is a noticeable difference in dorsal down coloration between males and females, with females having darker dorsal plumage and males having lighter plumage. The ability to autosex day-old goslings based on their dorsal down coloration is important for managing them efficiently and planning their nutrition in the poultry industry. The aim of this study was to determine the biological and genetic factors underlying this difference in dorsal down colorationthrough histological analysis, biochemical assays, transcriptomic profiling, and q-PCR analysis.Results Tissue analysis and biochemical assays revealed that compared with males, 17-day-old embryos and day-old goslings of female geese exhibited a greater density of melanin-containing feather follicles and a greater melanin concentration in these follicles during development. Both female and male goslings had lower melanin concentrations in their dorsal skin compared to 17-day-old embryos. Transcriptome analysis identified a set of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (MC1R, TYR, TYRP1, DCT and MITF) associated with melanogenesis pathways that were downregulated or silenced specifically in the dorsal skin of day-old goslings compared to 17-day-old embryos, affecting melanin synthesis in feather follicles. Additionally, two key genes (MC1R and MITF) associated with feather coloration showed differences between males and females, with females having higher expression levels correlated with increased melanin synthesis and darker plumage.Conclusion The expression of multiple melanogenesis genes determines melanin synthesis in goose feather follicles. The dorsal down coloration of day-old Hungarian white goose goslings shows sexual dimorphism, likely due to differences in the expression of the MC1R and MITF genes between males and females. These results could help us better understand why male and female goslings exhibit different plumage patterns.
BackgroundFish reproduction, development and growth are directly affected by temperature, investigating the regulatory mechanisms behind high temperature stress is helpful to construct a finer molecular network. In this study, we systematically analyzed the transcriptome and miRNA information of American shad (Alosa sapidissima) liver tissues at different cultivation temperatures of 24 degree celsius (Low), 27 degree celsius (Mid) and 30 degree celsius (High) based on a high-throughput sequencing platform. ResultsThe results showed that there were 1594 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 660 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs) in the LowLi vs. MidLi comparison group, 473 DEGs and 84 DEMs in the MidLi vs. HighLi group, 914 DEGs and 442 DEMs in the LowLi vs. HighLi group. These included some important genes and miRNAs such as calr, hsp90b1, hsp70, ssa-miR-125a-3p, ssa-miR-92b-5p, dre-miR-15a-3p and novel-m1018-5p. The DEGs were mainly enriched in the protein folding, processing and export pathways of the endoplasmic reticulum; the target genes of the DEMs were mainly enriched in the focal adhesion pathway. Furthermore, the association analysis revealed that the key genes were mainly enriched in the metabolic pathway. Interestingly, we found a significant increase in the number of genes and miRNAs involved in the regulation of heat stress during the temperature change from 24 degrees C to 27 degrees C. In addition, we examined the tissue expression characteristics of some key genes and miRNAs by qPCR, and found that calr, hsp90b1 and dre-miR-125b-2-3p were significantly highly expressed in the liver at 27 degree celsius, while novel-m0481-5p, ssa-miR-125a-3p, ssa-miR-92b-5p, dre-miR-15a-3p and novel-m1018-5p had the highest expression in the heart at 30degree celsius. Finally, the quantitative expression trends of 10 randomly selected DEGs and 10 DEMs were consistent with the sequencing data, indicating the reliability of the results. ConclusionsIn summary, this study provides some fundamental data for subsequent in-depth research into the molecular regulatory mechanisms of A. sapidissima response to heat stress, and for the selective breeding of high temperature tolerant varieties.
Radish exhibits significant variation in color, particularly in sprouts, leaves, petals, fleshy roots, and other tissues, displaying a range of hues such as green, white, red, purple, and black. Although extensive research has been conducted on the color variation of radish, the underlying mechanism behind the variation in radish flower color remains unclear. To date, there is a lack of comprehensive research investigating the variation mechanism of radish sprouts, leaves, fleshy roots, and flower organs. This study aims to address this gap by utilizing transcriptome sequencing to acquire transcriptome data for white and purple radish flowers. Additionally, the published transcriptome data of sprouts, leaves, and fleshy roots were incorporated to conduct a systematic analysis of the regulatory mechanisms underlying anthocyanin biosynthesis in these four radish tissues. The comparative transcriptome analysis revealed differential expression of the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway genes DFR, UGT78D2, TT12 and CPC in the four radish tissues. Additionally, the WGCNA results identified RsDFR.9c and RsUGT78D2.2c as hub genes responsible for regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis. By integrating the findings from the comparative transcriptome analysis, WGCNA, and anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway-related gene expression patterns, it is hypothesized that genes RsDFR.9c and RsUGT78D2.2c may serve as pivotal regulators of anthocyanins in the four radish tissues. Furthermore, the tissue-specific expression of the four copies of RsPAP1 is deemed crucial in governing anthocyanin synthesis and accumulation. Our results provide new insights into the molecular mechanism of anthocyanin biosynthesis and accumulation in different tissues of radish.
Background Gut microbiota(GM) have been proven associated with lots of gastrointestinal diseases, but its causal relationship with Gastroesophageal reflux disease(GERD) and Barrett's esophagus(BE) hasn't been explored. We aimed to uncover the causal relation between GM and GERD/BE and potential mediators by utilizing Mendelian Randomization(MR) analysis.Methods Summary statistics of GM(comprising 301 bacteria taxa and 205 metabolism pathways) were extracted from MiBioGen Consortium(N = 18,340) and Dutch Microbiome Project(N = 7,738), GERD and BE from a multitrait meta-analysis(NGERD=602,604, NBE=56,429). Bidirectional two-sample MR analysis and linkage disequilibrium score regression(LDSC) were used to explore the genetic correlation between GM and GERD/BE. Mediation MR analysis was performed for the risk factors of GERD/BE, including Body mass index(BMI), weight, type 2 diabetes, major depressive disorder(MDD), smoking initiation, alcohol consumption, and dietary intake(including carbohydrate, sugar, fat, protein intake), to detect the potential mediators between GM and GERD/BE.Results 11 bacterial taxa and 13 metabolism pathways were found associated with GERD, and 18 taxa and 5 pathways exhibited causal relationship with BE. Mediation MR analysis suggested weight and BMI played a crucial role in these relationships. LDSC identified 1 taxon and 4 metabolism pathways related to GERD, and 1 taxon related to BE. Specie Faecalibacterium prausnitzii had a suggestive impact on both GERD(OR = 1.087, 95%CI = 1.01-1.17) and BE(OR = 1.388, 95%CI = 1.03-1.86) and LDSC had determined their correlation. Reverse MR indicated that BE impacted 10 taxa and 4 pathways.Conclusions This study established a causal link between gut microbiota and GERD/BE, and identified the probable mediators. It offers new insights into the role of gut microbiota in the development and progression of GERD and BE in the host.
BackgroundThe association between MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and diseases is crucial in treating and exploring many diseases or cancers. Although wet-lab methods for predicting miRNA-disease associations (MDAs) are effective, they are often expensive and time-consuming. Significant advancements have been made using Graph Neural Network-based methods (GNN-MDAs) to address these challenges. However, these methods still face limitations, such as not considering nodes' deep-level similarity associations and hierarchical learning patterns. Additionally, current models do not retain the memory of previously learned heterogeneous historical information about miRNAs or diseases, only focusing on parameter learning without the capability to remember heterogeneous associations.ResultsThis study introduces the K-means disentangled high-level biological similarity to utilize potential hierarchical relationships fully and proposes a Graph Attention Heterogeneous Biological Memory Network architecture (DiGAMN) with memory capabilities. Extensive experiments were conducted across four datasets, comparing the DiGAMN model and its disentangling method against ten state-of-the-art non-disentangled methods and six traditional GNNs. DiGAMN excelled, achieving AUC scores of 96.35%, 96.10%, 96.01%, and 95.89% on the Data1 to Data4 datasets, respectively, surpassing all other models. These results confirm the superior performance of DiGAMN and its disentangling method. Additionally, various ablation studies were conducted to validate the contributions of different modules within the framework, and's encoding statuses and memory units of DiGAMN were visualized to explore the utility and functionality of its modules. Case studies confirmed the effectiveness of DiGAMN's predictions, identifying several new disease-associated miRNAs.ConclusionsDiGAMN introduces the use of a disentangled biological similarity approach for the first time and successfully constructs a Disentangled Graph Attention Heterogeneous Biological Memory Network model. This network can learn disentangled representations of similarity information and effectively store the potential biological entanglement information of miRNAs and diseases. By integrating disentangled similarity information with a heterogeneous attention memory network, DiGAMN enhances the model's ability to capture and utilize complex underlying biological data, significantly outperforming many existing models. The concepts used in this method also provide new perspectives for predicting miRNAs associated with diseases.
Background Organellar genomes have become increasingly essential for studying genetic diversity, phylogenetics, and evolutionary histories of seaweeds. The order Dictyotales (Dictyotophycidae), a highly diverse lineage within the Phaeophyceae, is long-term characterized by a scarcity of organellar genome datasets compared to orders of the brown algal crown radiation (Fucophycidae). Results We sequenced the organellar genomes of Padina usoehtunii, a representative of the order Dictyotales, to investigate the structural and evolutionary differences by comparing to five other major brown algal orders. Our results confirmed previously reported findings that the rate of structural rearrangements in chloroplast genomes is higher than that in mitochondria, whereas mitochondrial sequences exhibited a higher substitution rate compared to chloroplasts. Such evolutionary patterns contrast with land plants and green algae. The expansion and contraction of the inverted repeat (IR) region in the chloroplast correlated with the changes in the number of boundary genes. Specifically, the size of the IR region influenced the position of the boundary gene rpl21, with complete rpl21 genes found within the IR region in Dictyotales, Sphacelariales and Ectocarpales, while the rpl21 genes in Desmarestiales, Fucales, and Laminariales span both the IR and short single copy (SSC) regions. The absence of the rbcR gene in the Dictyotales may indicate an endosymbiotic transfer from the chloroplast to the nuclear genome. Inversion of the SSC region occurred at least twice in brown algae. Once in a lineage only represented by the Ectocarpales in the present study and once in a lineage only represented by the Fucales. Photosystem genes in the chloroplasts experienced the strongest signature of purifying selection, while ribosomal protein genes in both chloroplasts and mitochondria underwent a potential weak purifying selection. Conclusions Variations in chloroplast genome structure among different brown algal orders are evolutionarily linked to their phylogenetic positions in the Phaeophyceae tree. Chloroplast genomes harbor more structural rearrangements than the mitochondria, despite mitochondrial genes exhibiting faster mutation rates. The position and the change in the number of boundary genes likely shaped the IR regions in the chloroplast, and the produced structural variability is important mechanistically to create gene diversity in brown algal chloroplast.
BackgroundThe U-box gene family encodes E3 ubiquitin ligases involved in plant hormone signaling pathways and abiotic stress responses. However, there has yet to be a comprehensive analysis of the U-box gene family in maize (Zea mays L.) and its responses to abiotic stress. ResultsIn this study, 85 U-box family proteins were identified in maize and were classified into four subfamilies based on phylogenetic analysis. In addition to the conserved U-box domain, we identified additional functional domains, including Pkinase, ARM, KAP and Tyr domains, by analyzing the conserved motifs and gene structures. Chromosomal localization and collinearity analysis revealed that gene duplications may have contributed to the expansion and evolution of the U-box gene family. GO annotation and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis identified a total of 105 GO terms and 21 KEGG pathways that were notably enriched, including ubiquitin-protein transferase activity, ubiquitin conjugating enzyme activity and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis pathway. Tissue expression analysis showed that some ZmPUB genes were specifically expressed in certain tissues and that this could be due to their functions. In addition, RNA-seq data for maize seedlings under salt stress revealed 16 stress-inducible plant U-box genes, of which 10 genes were upregulated and 6 genes were downregulated. The qRT-PCR results for genes responding to abiotic stress were consistent with the transcriptome analysis. Among them, ZmPUB13, ZmPUB18, ZmPUB19 and ZmPUB68 were upregulated under all three abiotic stress conditions. Subcellular localization analysis showed that ZmPUB19 and ZmPUB59 were located in the nucleus. ConclusionsOverall, our study provides a comprehensive analysis of the U-box gene family in maize and its responses to abiotic stress, suggesting that U-box genes play an important role in the stress response and providing insights into the regulatory mechanisms underlying the response to abiotic stress in maize.
BackgroundAging is a prominent risk factor for diverse diseases; therefore, an in-depth understanding of its physiological mechanisms is required. Nonhuman primates, which share the closest genetic relationship with humans, serve as an ideal model for exploring the complex aging process. However, the potential of the nonhuman primate animal model in the screening of human aging markers is still not fully exploited. Multiomics analysis of nonhuman primate peripheral blood offers a promising approach to evaluate new therapies and biomarkers. This study explores aging-related biomarker through multilayer omics, including transcriptomics (mRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA) and proteomics (serum and serum-derived exosomes) in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta).ResultsOur findings reveal that, unlike mRNAs and circRNAs, highly expressed lncRNAs are abundant during the key aging period and are associated with cancer pathways. Comparative analysis highlighted exosomal proteins contain more types of proteins than serum proteins, indicating that serum-derived exosomes primarily regulate aging through metabolic pathways. Finally, eight candidate aging biomarkers were identified, which may serve as blood-based indicators for detecting age-related brain changes.ConclusionsOur results provide a comprehensive understanding of nonhuman primate blood transcriptomes and proteomes, offering novel insights into the aging mechanisms for preventing or treating age-related diseases.
Background Cryptolaemus montrouzieri (Coccinellidae) is widely utilized as biological control agents in modern agriculture. A comprehensive understanding of its food preference can help guide mass rearing and safety management during field application of pest control. Although some studies have paid attentions to the impacts of prey shift on C. montrouzieri, little is known regarding the role of post-transcriptional regulations in its acclimation to unnatural preys. Results We performed a genome-wide investigation on alternative splicing dynamics in C. montrouzieri in response to the predation transition from natural prey to unnatural ones. When feeding on undesired diets, 402-764 genes were differentially alternative spliced in C. montrouzieri. It is noteworthy that the majority of these genes (> 87%) were not differentially expressed, and these differentially spliced genes regulated distinct biological processes from differentially expressed genes, such as organ development and morphogenesis, locomotory behavior, and homeostasis processes. These suggested the functionally nonredendant role of alternative splicing in modulating physiological and metabolic responses of C. montrouzieri to the shift to undesired preys. In addition, the individuals feeding on aphids were subject to a lower level of changes in splicing than other alternative diets, which might be because of the similar chemical and microbial compositions. Our study further suggested a putative coupling of alternative splicing and nonsense-mediated decay (AS-NMD), which may play an important role in fine-tuning the protein repertoire of C. montrouzieri, and promoting its acclimation to predation changes. Conclusion These findings highlight the key role of alternative splicing in modulating the acclimation of ladybirds to prey shift and provide new genetic clues for the future application of ladybirds in biocontrol.
Background PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR (PRR) genes are essential components of circadian clock, playing vital roles in multiple processes including plant growth, flowering and stress response. Nonetheless, little is known about the evolution and function of PRR family in Rosaceae species. Results In this study, a total of 43 PRR genes in seven Rosaceae species were identified through comprehensive analysis. The evolutionary relationships were analyzed with phylogenetic tree, duplication events and synteny. PRR genes were classified into three groups (PRR1, PRR5/9, PRR3/7). The expansion of PRR family was mainly derived from dispersed and whole-genome duplication events. Purifying selection was the major force for PRR family evolution. Synteny analysis indicated the existence of multiple orthologous PRR gene pairs between pear and other Rosaceae species. Moreover, the conserved motifs of eight PbPRR proteins supported the phylogenetic relationship. PRR genes showed diverse expression pattern in various tissues of pear (Pyrus bretschneideri). Transcript analysis under 12-h light/ dark cycle and constant light conditions revealed that PRR genes exhibited distinct rhythmic oscillations in pear. PbPRR59a and PbPRR59b highly homologous to AtPRR5 and AtPRR9 were cloned for further functional verification. PbPRR59a and PbPRR59b proteins were localized in the nucleus. The ectopic overexpression of PbPRR59a and PbPRR59b significantly delayed flowering in Arabidopsis transgenic plants by repress the expression of AtGI, AtCO and AtFT under long-day conditions. Conclusions These results provide information for exploring the evolution of PRR genes in plants, and contribute to the subsequent functional studies of PRR genes in pear and other Rosaceae species.
Background Plant U-box (PUB) E3 ubiquitin ligases have vital effects on various biological processes. Therefore, a comprehensive and systematic identification of the members of the U-box gene family in potato will help to understand the evolution and function of U-box E3 ubiquitin ligases in plants.ResultsThis work identified altogether 74 PUBs in the potato (StPUBs) and examined their gene structures, chromosomal distributions, and conserved motifs. There were seventy-four StPUB genes on ten chromosomes with diverse densities. As revealed by phylogenetic analysis on PUBs within potato, Arabidopsis, tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), cabbage (Brassica oleracea), rice (Oryza sativa), and corn (Zea mays), were clustered into eight subclasses (C1-C8). According to synteny analysis, there were 40 orthologous StPUB genes to Arabidopsis, 58 to tomato, 28 to cabbage, 7 to rice, and 8 to corn. In addition, RNA-seq data downloaded from PGSC were utilized to reveal StPUBs' abiotic stress responses and tissue-specific expression in the doubled-monoploid potato (DM). Inaddition, we performed RNA-seq on the 'Atlantic' (drought-sensitive cultivar, DS) and the 'Qingshu NO.9' (drought-tolerant cultivar, DT) in early flowering, full-blooming, along with flower-falling stages to detect genes that might be involved in response to drought stress. Finally, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was carried out to analyze three candidate genes for their expression levels within 100 mM NaCl- and 10% PEG 6000 (w/v)-treated potato plantlets for a 24-h period. Furthermore, we analyzed the drought tolerance of StPUB25 transgenic plants and found that overexpression of StPUB25 significantly increased peroxidase (POD) activity, reduced ROS (reactive oxygen species) and MDA (malondialdehyde) accumulation compared with wild-type (WT) plants, and enhancing drought tolerance of the transgenic plants.ConclusionIn this study, three candidate genes related to drought tolerance in potato were excavated, and the function of StPUB25 under drought stress was verified. These results should provide valuable information to understand the potato StPUB gene family and investigate the molecular mechanisms of StPUBs regulating potato drought tolerance.
Background The introduction of non-native species is a primary driver of biodiversity loss in freshwater ecosystems. The redclaw crayfish (Cherax quadricarinatus) is a freshwater species that exhibits tolerance to hypoxic stresses, fluctuating temperatures, high ammonia concentration. These hardy physiological characteristics make C. quadricarinatus a popular aquaculture species and a potential invasive species that can negatively impact tropical and subtropical ecosystems. Investigating the genomic basis of environmental tolerances and immune adaptation in C. quadricarinatus will facilitate the development of management strategies of this potential invasive species. Results We constructed a chromosome-level genome of C. quadricarinatus by integrating Nanopore and PacBio techniques. Comparative genomic analysis suggested that transposable elements and tandem repeats drove genome size evolution in decapod crustaceans. The expansion of nine immune-related gene families contributed to the disease resistance of C. quadricarinatus. Three hypoxia-related genes (KDM3A, KDM5A, HMOX2) were identified as being subjected to positive selection in C. quadricarinatus. Additionally, in vivo analysis revealed that upregulating KDM5A was crucial for hypoxic response in C. quadricarinatus. Knockdown of KDM5A impaired hypoxia tolerance in this species. Conclusions Our results provide the genomic basis for hypoxic tolerance and immune adaptation in C. quadricarinatus, facilitating the management of this potential invasive species. Additionally, in vivo analysis in C. quadricarinatus suggests that the role of KDM5A in the hypoxic response of animals is complex.
BackgroundDirect RNA sequencing (dRNA-seq) on the Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) platforms can produce reads covering up to full-length gene transcripts, while containing decipherable information about RNA base modifications and poly-A tail lengths. Although many published studies have been expanding the potential of dRNA-seq, its sequencing accuracy and error patterns remain understudied.ResultsWe present the first comprehensive evaluation of sequencing accuracy and characterisation of systematic errors in dRNA-seq data from diverse organisms and synthetic in vitro transcribed RNAs. We found that for sequencing kits SQK-RNA001 and SQK-RNA002, the median read accuracy ranged from 87% to 92% across species, and deletions significantly outnumbered mismatches and insertions. Due to their high abundance in the transcriptome, heteropolymers and short homopolymers were the major contributors to the overall sequencing errors. We also observed systematic biases across all species at the levels of single nucleotides and motifs. In general, cytosine/uracil-rich regions were more likely to be erroneous than guanines and adenines. By examining raw signal data, we identified the underlying signal-level features potentially associated with the error patterns and their dependency on sequence contexts. While read quality scores can be used to approximate error rates at base and read levels, failure to detect DNA adapters may be a source of errors and data loss. By comparing distinct basecallers, we reason that some sequencing errors are attributable to signal insufficiency rather than algorithmic (basecalling) artefacts. Lastly, we generated dRNA-seq data using the latest SQK-RNA004 sequencing kit released at the end of 2023 and found that although the overall read accuracy increased, the systematic errors remain largely identical compared to the previous kits.ConclusionsAs the first systematic investigation of dRNA-seq errors, this study offers a comprehensive overview of reproducible error patterns across diverse datasets, identifies potential signal-level insufficiency, and lays the foundation for error correction methods.
BackgroundOver their evolutionary history, corals have adapted to sea level rise and increasing ocean temperatures, however, it is unclear how quickly they may respond to rapid change. Genome structure and genetic diversity contained within may highlight their adaptive potential.ResultsWe present chromosome-scale genome assemblies and linkage maps of the critically endangered Atlantic acroporids, Acropora palmata and A. cervicornis. Both assemblies and linkage maps were resolved into 14 chromosomes with their gene content and colinearity. Repeats and chromosome arrangements were largely preserved between the species. The family Acroporidae and the genus Acropora exhibited many phylogenetically significant gene family expansions. Macrosynteny decreased with phylogenetic distance. Nevertheless, scleractinians shared six of the 21 cnidarian ancestral linkage groups as well as numerous fission and fusion events compared to other distantly related cnidarians. Genetic linkage maps were constructed from one A. palmata family and 16 A. cervicornis families using a genotyping array. The consensus maps span 1,013.42 cM and 927.36 cM for A. palmata and A. cervicornis, respectively. Both species exhibited high genome-wide recombination rates (3.04 to 3.53 cM/Mb) and pronounced sex-based differences, known as heterochiasmy, with 2 to 2.5X higher recombination rates estimated in the female maps.ConclusionsTogether, the chromosome-scale assemblies and genetic maps we present here are the first detailed look at the genomic landscapes of the critically endangered Atlantic acroporids. These data sets revealed that adaptive capacity of Atlantic acroporids is not limited by their recombination rates. The sister species maintain macrosynteny with few genes with high sequence divergence that may act as reproductive barriers between them. In the Atlantic Acropora, hybridization between the two sister species yields an F1 hybrid with limited fertility despite the high levels of macrosynteny and gene colinearity of their genomes. Together, these resources now enable genome-wide association studies and discovery of quantitative trait loci, two tools that can aid in the conservation of these species.
BackgroundAssessing farm animals' welfare is crucial, yet practical physiological tools are still lacking. In this study, we tested whether the peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) transcriptome shows variations in association with sows' welfare. To do this, we compared animals whose welfare states were assumed to differ due to their lives in more or less enriched environments and to their different dominance statuses. Sows were housed in a conventional (C, n = 36) or enriched (E, n = 35) environments from gestation day 0 (G0) until three weeks before farrowing (G105), after which they were transferred to individual farrowing crates. From G99 to G103, behavioral analyses were conducted, and sows' dominance status was evaluated. A subset of 28 multiparous sows (C, n = 14 and E, n = 14) was selected for the collection of saliva on G35 and G98 and hair on G98 for cortisol measurement, and of blood samples for PBMC transcriptome analysis on G98 and on lactation day 12 (L12).ResultsBoth environmental enrichment (EE) and dominance status influenced cortisol and variables related to social and exploratory behavior, indicating an influence on sows' welfare. In the transcriptomic analysis, among the 12,260 genes submitted to differential analysis on G98, EE impacted 31 genes, while dominance status impacted 449 genes. Compared with subordinate sows (SUB), dominant (DOM) sows exhibited an upregulation of genes related to inflammatory process and plasma cell function, and downregulation of genes related to B-cell activation. In groups of sows, dominance status is partly related to sows' parity; therefore, we compared the effect of dominance with that of parity. Some common genes emerged when comparing high-parity (HP) vs. low-parity (LP) sows (542 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including 180 in common with dominance-related genes), indicating that some effects of dominance on the transcriptome during gestation were in fact more due to age or reproductive cycles than to dominance itself. EE and dominance effects appeared relatively short-term, as DEG numbers decreased on L12 (four DEGs for E vs. C, 25 for DOM vs. SUB).ConclusionsDominance status exerted a more pronounced influence on sows' PBMC transcriptome than did environmental enrichment. In particular, dominance status modulated genes associated with B cells and plasma cell functions. Some of the genes identified in this study could be tested in the future as potential molecular markers of well-being.
Prolonged or chronic social isolation has pronounced effects on animals, ranging from altered stress responses, increased anxiety and aggressive behaviour, and even increased mortality. The effects of shorter periods of isolation are much less well researched; however, short periods of isolation are used routinely for testing animal behaviour and physiology. Here, we studied how a 3 h period of isolation from a cagemate affected neural gene expression in three brain regions that contain important components of the social decision-making network, the hypothalamus, the nucleus taeniae of the amygdala, and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, using a gregarious bird as a model (zebra finches). We found evidence suggestive of altered neural activity, synaptic transmission, metabolism, and even potentially pain perception, all of which could create cofounding effects on experimental tests that involve isolating animals. We recommend that the effects of short-term social isolation need to be better understood and propose alternatives to isolating animals for testing.
BackgroundThe accurate prediction of genomic breeding values is central to genomic selection in both plant and animal breeding studies. Genomic prediction involves the use of thousands of molecular markers spanning the entire genome and therefore requires methods able to efficiently handle high dimensional data. Not surprisingly, machine learning methods are becoming widely advocated for and used in genomic prediction studies. These methods encompass different groups of supervised and unsupervised learning methods. Although several studies have compared the predictive performances of individual methods, studies comparing the predictive performance of different groups of methods are rare. However, such studies are crucial for identifying (i) groups of methods with superior genomic predictive performance and assessing (ii) the merits and demerits of such groups of methods relative to each other and to the established classical methods. Here, we comparatively evaluate the genomic predictive performance and informally assess the computational cost of several groups of supervised machine learning methods, specifically, regularized regression methods, deep, ensemble and instance-based learning algorithms, using one simulated animal breeding dataset and three empirical maize breeding datasets obtained from a commercial breeding program.ResultsOur results show that the relative predictive performance and computational expense of the groups of machine learning methods depend upon both the data and target traits and that for classical regularized methods, increasing model complexity can incur huge computational costs but does not necessarily always improve predictive accuracy. Thus, despite their greater complexity and computational burden, neither the adaptive nor the group regularized methods clearly improved upon the results of their simple regularized counterparts. This rules out selection of one procedure among machine learning methods for routine use in genomic prediction. The results also show that, because of their competitive predictive performance, computational efficiency, simplicity and therefore relatively few tuning parameters, the classical linear mixed model and regularized regression methods are likely to remain strong contenders for genomic prediction.ConclusionsThe dependence of predictive performance and computational burden on target datasets and traits call for increasing investments in enhancing the computational efficiency of machine learning algorithms and computing resources.
Background Leaves are the nutritional and economic organs of tobacco, and their biomass directly affects tobacco yield and the economic benefits of farmers. In the early stage, our research found that tobacco hybrids have more leaves and larger leaf areas, but the performance and formation reasons of biomass heterosis are not yet clear. Results This study selected 5 parents with significant differences in tobacco biomass and paired them with hybrid varieties. It was found that tobacco hybrid varieties have a common biomass heterosis, and 45 days after transplantation is the key period for the formation of tobacco biomass heterosis; By analyzing the biomass heterosis of hybrids, Va116xGDH94 and its parents were selected for transcriptome analysis. 76.69% of the differentially expressed genes between Va116xGDH94 and its parents showed overdominant expression pattern, and these overdominant expression genes were significantly enriched in the biological processes of photosynthesis and TCA cycle; During the process of photosynthesis, the overdominant up-regulation of genes such as Lhc, Psa, and rbcl promotes the progress of photosynthesis, thereby increasing the accumulation of tobacco biomass; During the respiratory process, genes such as MDH, ACO, and OGDH are overedominantly down-regulated, inhibiting the TCA cycle and reducing substrate consumption in hybrid offspring; The photosynthetic characteristics of the hybrid and its parents were measured, and the net photosynthetic capacity of the hybrid was significantly higher than that of the parents. Conclusion These results indicate that the overdominant expression effect of differentially expressed genes in Va116xGDH94 and its parents plays a crucial role in the formation of tobacco biomass heterosis. The overdominant expression of genes related to photosynthesis and respiration enhances the photosynthetic ability of Va116xGDH94, reduces respiratory consumption, promotes the increase of biomass, and exhibits obvious heterosis.
Background Most of the important biological mechanisms and functions of transmembrane proteins (TMPs) are realized through their interactions with non-transmembrane proteins(nonTMPs). The interactions between TMPs and nonTMPs in cells play vital roles in intracellular signaling, energy metabolism, investigating membrane-crossing mechanisms, correlations between disease and drugs.Results Despite the importance of TMP-nonTMP interactions, the study of them remains in the wet experimental stage, lacking specific and comprehensive studies in the field of bioinformatics. To fill this gap, we performed a comprehensive statistical analysis of known TMP-nonTMP interactions and constructed a deep learning-based predictor to identify potential interactions. The statistical analysis describes known TMP-nonTMP interactions from various perspectives, such as distributions of species and protein families, enrichment of GO and KEGG pathways, as well as hub proteins and subnetwork modules in the PPI network. The predictor implemented by an end-to-end deep learning model can identify potential interactions from protein primary sequence information. The experimental results over the independent validation demonstrated considerable prediction performance with an MCC of 0.541.Conclusions To our knowledge, we were the first to focus on TMP-nonTMP interactions. We comprehensively analyzed them using bioinformatics methods and predicted them via deep learning-based solely on their sequence. This research completes a key link in the protein network, benefits the understanding of protein functions, and helps in pathogenesis studies of diseases and associated drug development.
BackgroundChrysanthemum morifolium 'HangBaiJu', a popular medicinal and edible plant, exerts its biological activities primarily through the presence of flavones and caffeoylquinic acids (CQAs). However, the regulatory mechanism of flavone and CQA biosynthesis in the chrysanthemum capitulum remains unclear.ResultsIn this study, the content of flavones and CQAs during the development of chrysanthemum capitulum was determined by HPLC, revealing an accumulation pattern with higher levels at S1 and S2 and a gradual decrease at S3 to S5. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that CmPAL1/2, CmCHS1/2, CmFNS, CmHQT, and CmHCT were key structural genes in flavones and CQAs biosynthesis. Furthermore, weighted gene co-expression correlation network analysis (WGCNA), k-means clustering, correlation analysis and protein interaction prediction were carried out in this study to identify transcription factors (TFs) associated with flavone and CQA biosynthesis, including MYB, bHLH, AP2/ERF, and MADS-box families. The TFs CmERF/PTI6 and CmCMD77 were proposed to act as upstream regulators of CmMYB3 and CmbHLH143, while CmMYB3 and CmbHLH143 might form a complex to directly regulate the structural genes CmPAL1/2, CmCHS1/2, CmFNS, CmHQT, and CmHCT, thereby controlling flavone and CQA biosynthesis.ConclusionsOverall, these findings provide initial insights into the TF regulatory network underlying flavones and CQAs accumulation in the chrysanthemum capitulum, which laid a theoretical foundation for the quality improvement of C. morifolium 'HangBaiJu' and the high-quality development of the industry.
Background Mitochondria play crucial roles in the growth, development, and adaptation of plants. Blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L.) stands out as a significant berry species due to its rich nutritional profile, medicinal properties, and health benefits. Despite its importance, the mitochondrial genome of blackcurrant remains unassembled. Results This study presents the first assembly of the mitochondrial genome of R. nigrum in the Grossulariaceae family. The genome spans 450,227 base pairs (bp) and encompasses 39 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 19 transfer RNAs (tRNAs), and three ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs). Protein-coding regions constitute 8.88% of the entire genome. Additionally, we identified 180 simple sequence repeats, 12 tandem repeats, and 432 pairs of dispersed repeats. Notably, the dispersed sequence R1 (cotig3, 1,129 bp) mediated genome recombination, resulting in the formation of two major conformations, namely master and double circles. Furthermore, we identified 731 C-to-U RNA editing sites within the PCGs. Among these, cox1-2, nad1-2, and nad4L-2 were associated with the creation of start codons, whereas atp6-718 and rps10-391 were linked to termination codons. We also detected fourteen plastome fragments within the mitogenome, constituting 1.11% of the total length. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that R. nigrum might have undergone multiple genomic reorganization and/or gene transfer events, resulting in the loss of two PCGs (rps2 and rps11) during its evolutionary history. Conclusions This investigation unveils the molecular characteristics of the R. nigrum mitogenome, shedding light on its evolutionary trajectory and phylogenetic implications. Furthermore, it serves as a valuable reference for evolutionary research and germplasm identification within the genus.
BackgroundShort tandem repeats (STRs) are widely distributed across the human genome and are associated with numerous neurological disorders. However, the extent that STRs contribute to disease is likely under-estimated because of the challenges calling these variants in short read next generation sequencing data. Several computational tools have been developed for STR variant calling, but none fully address all of the complexities associated with this variant class.ResultsHere we introduce LUSTR which is designed to address some of the challenges associated with STR variant calling by enabling more flexibility in defining STR loci, allowing for customizable modules to tailor analyses, and expanding the capability to call somatic and multiallelic STR variants. LUSTR is a user-friendly and easily customizable tool for targeted or unbiased genome-wide STR variant screening that can use either predefined or novel genome builds. Using both simulated and real data sets, we demonstrated that LUSTR accurately infers germline and somatic STR expansions in individuals with and without diseases.ConclusionsLUSTR offers a powerful and user-friendly approach that allows for the identification of STR variants and can facilitate more comprehensive studies evaluating the role of pathogenic STR variants across human diseases.
Background Gastropods of the genus Biomphalaria (Family Planorbidae) are exploited as vectors by Schistosoma mansoni, the most common causative agent of human intestinal schistosomiasis. Using improved genomic resources, overviews of how Biomphalaria responds to S. mansoni and other metazoan parasites can provide unique insights into the reproductive, immune, and other systems of invertebrate hosts, and their responses to parasite challenges. Results Using Illumina-based RNA-Seq, we compared the responses of iM line B. glabrata at 2, 8, and 40 days post-infection (dpi) to single infections with S. mansoni, Echinostoma paraensei (both digenetic trematodes) or Daubaylia potomaca (a nematode parasite of planorbid snails). Responses were compared to unexposed time-matched control snails. We observed: (1) each parasite provoked a distinctive response with a predominance of down-regulated snail genes at all time points following exposure to either trematode, and of up-regulated genes at 8 and especially 40dpi following nematode exposure; (2) At 2 and 8dpi with either trematode, several snail genes associated with gametogenesis (particularly spermatogenesis) were down-regulated. Regarding the phenomenon of trematode-mediated parasitic castration in molluscs, we define for the first time a complement of host genes that are targeted, as early as 2dpi when trematode larvae are still small; (3) Differential gene expression of snails with trematode infection at 40dpi, when snails were shedding cercariae, was unexpectedly modest and revealed down-regulation of genes involved in the production of egg mass proteins and peptide processing; and (4) surprisingly, D. potomaca provoked up-regulation at 40dpi of many of the reproduction-related snail genes noted to be down-regulated at 2 and 8dpi following trematode infection. Happening at a time when B. glabrata began to succumb to D. potomaca, we hypothesize this response represents an unexpected form of fecundity compensation. We also document expression patterns for other Biomphalaria gene families, including fibrinogen domain-containing proteins (FReDs), C-type lectins, G-protein coupled receptors, biomphalysins, and protease and protease inhibitors. Conclusions Our study is relevant in identifying several genes involved in reproduction that are targeted by parasites in the vector snail B. glabrata and that might be amenable to manipulation to minimize their ability to serve as vectors of schistosomes.
BackgroundFemale ticks remain attached to their host for multiple days to complete a blood meal. This prolonged feeding period is accompanied by a significant increase in the tick's size and body weight, paralleled by noteworthy changes to the tick midgut. While the midgut is recognized for its established role in blood storage and processing, its importance extends to playing a crucial role in the acquisition, survival, and proliferation of pathogens. Despite this, our overall understanding of tick midgut biology is limited.ResultsOur transcriptome analysis identified 15,599 putative DNA coding sequences (CDS), which were classified into 26 functional groups. Dimensional and differential expression analyses revealed four primary transcriptional profiles corresponding to unfed, slow-feeding, transitory (from slow- to rapid-feeding), and rapid-feeding stages. Additionally, comparing the current dataset with previously deposited transcriptome from other tick species allowed the identification of commonly expressed transcripts across different feeding stages.ConclusionOur findings provide a detailed temporal resolution of numerous metabolic pathways in the midgut of A. americanum adult females throughout the feeding process, highlighting the dynamic transcriptional regulation of the tick's midgut as feeding progresses. Furthermore, we identified conserved transcripts across three different tick species that exhibit similar expression patterns. This knowledge not only enhances our understanding of the physiological processes within the tick midgut but also opens up potential avenues for developing control methods that target multiple tick species.
Background Like all other species, fungi are susceptible to infection by viruses. The diversity of fungal viruses has been rapidly expanding in recent years due to the availability of advanced sequencing technologies. However, compared to other virome studies, the research on fungi-associated viruses remains limited.Results In this study, we downloaded and analyzed over 200 public datasets from approximately 40 different Bioprojects to explore potential fungal-associated viral dark matter. A total of 12 novel viral sequences were identified, all of which are RNA viruses, with lengths ranging from 1,769 to 9,516 nucleotides. The amino acid sequence identity of all these viruses with any known virus is below 70%. Through phylogenetic analysis, these RNA viruses were classified into different orders or families, such as Mitoviridae, Benyviridae, Botourmiaviridae, Deltaflexiviridae, Mymonaviridae, Bunyavirales, and Partitiviridae. It is possible that these sequences represent new taxa at the level of family, genus, or species. Furthermore, a co-evolution analysis indicated that the evolutionary history of these viruses within their groups is largely driven by cross-species transmission events.Conclusions These findings are of significant importance for understanding the diversity, evolution, and relationships between genome structure and function of fungal viruses. However, further investigation is needed to study their interactions.
BackgroundBovine mastitis significantly impacts the dairy industry, causing economic losses through reduced milk production, lower milk quality, and increased health risks, and early detection is critical for effective treatment. This study analyzed milk electrical conductivity data from 9,846 Chinese Holstein cows over a two-year period, collected during three daily milking sessions, alongside smart collar data and dairy herd improvement test results. The aim was to conduct a comprehensive genetic analysis and assess the potential of milk electrical conductivity as a biomarker for the early detection of bovine subclinical mastitis.ResultsThe results revealed significant phenotypic and strong genetic correlations (-0.286 to 0.457) between milk electrical conductivity, somatic cell score, milk yield, activity quantity, and milking speed. Logistic regression models yielded area under the curve values ranging from 0.636 to 0.697 and odds ratio values from 9.70 to 10.69, demonstrating a certain predictive capability of milk electrical conductivity for identifying subclinical mastitis. Various factors influencing milk electrical conductivity, including lactation stage, environmental conditions, age at first calving, parity, and body condition score, were identified. The random regression model demonstrated moderate to high heritability of milk electrical conductivity (0.458 to 0.487), particularly during the early to mid-lactation periods, with all estimates exceeding 0.35 However, after day 275 of lactation, the heritability decreased to below 0.2. Notably, shifts in genetic factors affecting milk components were observed around 60 and 270 days into lactation, with increased environmental sensitivity to milk electrical conductivity during these periods.ConclusionsThis study demonstrates that milk electrical conductivity is influenced by multiple factors, such as age at first calving, parity, and body condition score, and exhibits significant phenotypic associations with somatic cell score, milk yield, activity quantity, and milking speed. Although milk electrical conductivity showed moderate to high heritability and potential as a predictor for subclinical mastitis, its low genetic correlations with SCS limit its effectiveness as a standalone indicator. Future research should focus on combining EC with other indicators to improve the accuracy of mastitis detection.
BackgroundThe vast majority of genes in the genome are multi-exonic, and are alternatively spliced during transcription, resulting in multiple isoforms for each gene. For some genes, different mRNA isoforms may have differential expression levels or be involved in different pathways. Bulk tissue RNA-seq, as a widely used technology for transcriptome quantification, measures the total expression (TE) levels of each gene across multiple isoforms in multiple cell types for each tissue sample. With recent developments in precise quantification of alternative splicing events for each gene, we propose to study the effects of alternative splicing variation on gene-gene correlation effects. We adopted a variance-component model for testing the TE-TE correlations of one gene with a co-expressed gene, accounting for the effects of splicing variation and splicing-by-TE interaction of one gene on the other.ResultsWe analyzed data from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project (V8). At the 5% FDR level, 38,146 pairs of genes out of similar to 10 M examined pairs from GTEx lung tissue showed significant TE-splicing interaction effects, implying isoform-specific and/or sample-specific TE-TE correlations. Additional analysis across 13 GTEx brain tissues revealed strong tissue-specificity of TE-splicing interaction effects. Moreover, we showed that accounting for splicing variation across samples could improve the reproducibility of results and could reduce potential confounding effects in studying co-expressed gene pairs with bulk tissue data. Many of those gene pairs had correlation effects specific to only certain isoforms and would otherwise be undetected. By analyzing gene-gene co-expression variation within functional pathways accounting for splicing, we characterized the patterns of the "hub" genes with isoform-specific regulatory effects on multiple other genes.ConclusionsWe showed that splicing variation of a gene may interact with TE of the gene and affect the TE of co-expressed genes, resulting in substantial tissue-specific inter-sample variability in gene-gene correlation effects. Accounting for TE-splicing interaction effects could reduce potential confounding effects and improve the robustness of estimation when estimating gene-gene correlations from bulk tissue expression data.
Biological networks serve a crucial role in elucidating intricate biological processes. While interspecies environmental interactions have been extensively studied, the exploration of gene interactions within species, particularly among individual microorganisms, is less developed. The increasing amount of microbiome genomic data necessitates a more nuanced analysis of microbial genome structures and functions. In this context, we introduce a complex structure using higher-order network theory, "Solid Motif Structures (SMS)", via a hierarchical biological network analysis of genomes within the same genus, effectively linking microbial genome structure with its function. Leveraging 162 high-quality genomes of Microcystis, a key freshwater cyanobacterium within microbial ecosystems, we established a genome structure network. Employing deep learning techniques, such as adaptive graph encoder, we uncovered 27 critical functional subnetworks and their associated SMSs. Incorporating metagenomic data from seven geographically distinct lakes, we conducted an investigation into Microcystis' functional stability under varying environmental conditions, unveiling unique functional interaction models for each lake. Our work compiles these insights into an extensive resource repository, providing novel perspectives on the functional dynamics within Microcystis. This research offers a hierarchical network analysis framework for understanding interactions between microbial genome structures and functions within the same genus.
Background Research into the genetic diversity of honey bee (Apis melliferaL.) populations has become increasingly significant in recent decades, primarily due to population declines attributed to human activities and climate change. As a species of great importance, breeding programs that leverage understanding of genomic diversity could offer solutions to mitigate these challenges. The objective of this study was to examine the genomic diversity and population structure of Carniolan honey bees (Apis mellifera carnica) using the Illumina SNP chip on a large honey bee sample collected from Central and South-Eastern European countries. The study also aims to offer recommendations for future breeding programs. Results Our analysis involved Discriminant Analysis of Principal Components (DAPC), heterozygosity, admixture analysis, fixation indices (FST), Neighbour-Joining tree, gene flow and Isolation-by-distance analysis. DAPC indicated distinct separation between the Carniolan and Italian honey bee (Apis mellifera ligustica) populations, whereas the admixture analysis revealed varying levels of gene flow and genetic admixture within the Carniolan honey bee populations, demonstrating closer relationships between specific geographic regions (confirmed by Isolation-by-distance analysis). Furthermore, the research of heterozygosity, genomic inbreeding, pairwise FST values, and Neighbour-Joining tree provided insights into the patterns of genetic differentiation and similarity among the populations of Carniolan honey bee within its natural habitat. We have observed genetic homogeneity of the Carniolan honey bee population when considered in a broader genetic/geographical context. However, the Carniolan honey bee has sufficient genetic diversity in its geographical home range that needs to be carefully monitored and maintained. Conclusions This study provides important insights into the genetic composition, differentiation, and relationships among Carniolan honey bee populations in Central and South-Eastern European countries. The findings are crucial for conservation efforts, breeding programs, and sustainable beekeeping practices. They emphasise the importance of considering genetic factors and population structure in the breeding and management of honey bees. By understanding these genetic relationships, we can develop strategies to preserve genetic diversity, improve breeding outcomes, and ensure the resilience of honey bee populations in the face of environmental changes and challenges. This knowledge can also inform policy makers and stakeholders on best practices to maintain healthy bee populations, which are vital for ecosystem services and agricultural productivity.
Pectobacterium carotovorum and Pectobacterium aroidearum represent the primary pathogens causing variable soft rot disease. However, the fundamental defense responses of Pinellia ternata to pathogens remain unclear. Our investigation demonstrated that the disease produced by P. carotovorum is more serious than P. aroidearum. RNA-seq analysis indicated that many cell wall-related genes, receptor-like kinase genes, and resistance-related genes were induced by P. aroidearum and P. carotovorum similarly. But many different regulatory pathways exert a crucial function in plant immunity against P. aroidearum and P. carotovorum, including hormone signaling, whereas more auxin-responsive genes were responsive to P. carotovorum, while more ethylene and gibberellin-responsive genes were responsive to P. aroidearum. 12 GDSL esterase/lipase genes and 3 fasciclin-like arabinogalactan protein genes were specifically upregulated by P. carotovorum, whereas 11 receptor-like kinase genes and 8 disease resistance genes were up-regulated only by P. aroidearum. Among them, a lectin gene (part1transcript/39001) was induced by P. carotovorum and P. aroidearum simultaneously. Transient expression in N. benthamiana demonstrated that the lectin gene improves plant resistance to P. carotovorum. This study offers a comprehensive perspective on P. ternata immunity produced by different soft rot pathogens and reveals the importance of lectin in anti-soft rot of P. ternata for the first time.
BackgroundPearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum (L.) R. Br.) is a vital cereal crop, predominantly cultivated in arid and semi-arid regions of Asia and Africa. It serves as a staple food for millions, while also being utilized as forage and an energy crop. The crop's resistance to heat and drought, coupled with its high biomass, positions it as a promising candidate for climate-resilient agriculture. A detailed understanding of its gene expression patterns across various tissues and developmental stages is essential for enhancing its yield and quality. This study aims to fill this knowledge gap by employing RNA-seq to identify housekeeping genes (HKGs) and tissue-specific genes (TSGs) in pearl millet.ResultsOur analysis of RNA-seq data from nine tissues (seed, germ, radicle, leaf, root, tillering tissue, stem, spike, and grain) across eight developmental stages in pearl millet accession Tifleaf3 revealed a comprehensive gene expression profile. We identified 461 HKGs that exhibited stable expression across all tissues and stages, providing robust internal references for RT-qPCR. Additionally, 8091 TSGs were discovered, many of which showed distinctive expression patterns in tissues such as spike, stem, and leaf. Functional enrichment analysis of these genes using GO and KEGG pathways highlighted their roles in key biological processes and pathways, indicating their potential in crop trait enhancement. Protein-protein interaction networks constructed for stem and leaf tissues further illuminated the regulatory mechanisms underlying the transition from vegetative to reproductive growth stages.ConclusionThis study presents a detailed transcriptomic landscape of pearl millet, identifying a set of HKGs and TSGs that are crucial for understanding the molecular basis of its growth and development. We provided valuable options for transcript normalization and crucial targets for exploring gene function for the plant growth and development in pearl millet. The insights gained from this work are instrumental for breeding programs aimed at enhancing the productivity of pearl millet, thereby contributing to food and energy security.
In this study, we applied comparative transcriptomics and proteomics techniques to systematically investigate the dynamic expression patterns of genes and proteins at various stages of early embryonic development of the gastropod Neptunea arthritica cumingii. Twelve cyclin-dependent kinase (CDKs) genes and five downstream proteins associated with these CDKs were identified. Through techniques such as qRT-PCR, our data elucidate for the first time the regulatory functions of CDK family genes and establish CDKs as a pivotal gene cluster in the early embryonic development of N. cumingii. These findings not only enhance the understanding of molecular developmental biology in N. cumingii and marine gastropods in general but also provide significant insights into the mechanisms involved in early embryonic development in N. cumingii. Furthermore, our results provide theoretical guidance for advancing artificial breeding technology for N. cumingii.
BackgroundSatellite cells are myogenic precursor cells in adult skeletal muscle and play a crucial role in skeletal muscle regeneration, maintenance, and growth. Like embryonic myoblasts, satellite cells have the ability to proliferate, differentiate, and fuse to form multinucleated myofibers. In this study, we aimed to identify additional transcription factors that control gene expression during bovine satellite cell proliferation and differentiation.ResultsUsing chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing, we identified 56,973 and 54,470 genomic regions marked with both the histone modifications H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, which were considered active enhancers, and 50,956 and 59,174 genomic regions marked with H3K27me3, which were considered repressed enhancers, in proliferating and differentiating bovine satellite cells, respectively. In addition, we identified 1,216 and 1,171 super-enhancers in proliferating and differentiating bovine satellite cells, respectively. Analyzing these enhancers showed that in proliferating bovine satellite cells, active enhancers were associated with genes stimulating cell proliferation or inhibiting myoblast differentiation whereas repressed enhancers were associated with genes essential for myoblast differentiation, and that in differentiating satellite cells, active enhancers were associated with genes essential for myoblast differentiation or muscle contraction whereas repressed enhancers were associated with genes stimulating cell proliferation or inhibiting myoblast differentiation. Active enhancers in proliferating bovine satellite cells were enriched with binding sites for many transcription factors such as MYF5 and the AP-1 family transcription factors; active enhancers in differentiating bovine satellite cells were enriched with binding sites for many transcription factors such as MYOG and TFAP4; and repressed enhancers in both proliferating and differentiating bovine satellite cells were enriched with binding sites for NF-kB, ZEB-1, and several other transcription factors. The role of TFAP4 in satellite cell or myoblast differentiation was previously unknown, and through gene knockdown and overexpression, we experimentally validated a critical role for TFAP4 in the differentiation and fusion of bovine satellite cells into myofibers.ConclusionsSatellite cell proliferation and differentiation are controlled by many transcription factors such as AP-1, TFAP4, NF-kB, and ZEB-1 whose roles in these processes were previously unknown in addition to those transcription factors such as MYF5 and MYOG whose roles in these processes are widely known.
Background Structural variations (SVs) are widespread across genome and have a great impact on evolution, disease, and phenotypic diversity. Despite the development of numerous bioinformatic tools, commonly referred to as SV callers, tailored for detecting SVs using whole genome sequence (WGS) data and employing diverse algorithms, their performance necessitates rigorous evaluation with real data and validated SVs. Moreover, a considerable proportion of these tools have been primarily designed and optimized using human genome data. Consequently, their applicability and performance in Avian species, characterized by smaller genomes and distinct genomic architectures, remain inadequately assessed. Results We performed a comprehensive assessment of the performance of ten widely used SV callers using population-level real genomic data with the validated five common types of SVs. The performance of SV callers varies with the types and sizes of SVs. As compared with other tools, GRIDSS, Lumpy, Wham, and Manta present better detection accuracy. Pindel can detect more small SVs than others. CNVnator and CNVkit can detect more medium and large copy number variations. Given the poor consistency among different SV callers, the combination calling strategy is not recommended. All tools show poor ability in the detection of insertions (especially with size > 150 bp). At least 50x read depth is required to detect more than 80% of the SVs for most tools. Conclusions This study highlights the importance and necessity of using real sequencing data, rather than simulated data only, with validated SVs for SV caller evaluation. Some practical guidance and suggestions are provided for SV detection in future researches.
Developmental delay (DD), or intellectual disability (ID) is a very large group of early onset disorders that affects 1-2% of children worldwide, which have diverse genetic causes that should be identified. Genetic studies can elucidate the pathogenesis underlying DD/ID. In this study, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on 225 Chinese DD/ID children (208 cases were sequenced as proband-parent trio) who were classified into seven phenotype subgroups. The phenotype and genomic data of patients with DD/ID were further retrospectively analyzed. There were 96/225 (42.67%; 95% confidence interval [CI] 36.15-49.18%) patients were found to have causative single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small insertions/deletions (Indels) associated with DD/ID based on WES data. The diagnostic yields among the seven subgroups ranged from 31.25 to 71.43%. Three specific clinical features, hearing loss, visual loss, and facial dysmorphism, can significantly increase the diagnostic yield of WES in patients with DD/ID (P = 0.005, P = 0.005, and P = 0.039, respectively). Of note, hearing loss (odds ratio [OR] = 1.86%; 95% CI = 1.00-3.46, P = 0.046) or abnormal brainstem auditory evoked potential (BAEP) (OR = 1.91, 95% CI = 1.02-3.50, P = 0.042) was independently associated with causative genetic variants in DD/ID children. Our findings enrich the variation spectrums of SNVs/Indels associated with DD/ID, highlight the value genetic testing for DD/ID children, stress the importance of BAEP screen in DD/ID children, and help to facilitate early diagnose, clinical management and reproductive decisions, improve therapeutic response to medical treatment.
BackgroundThe yak (Bos grunniens) is essential to the livelihoods of Tibetan people on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau; however, its growth and productivity are constrained by the region's harsh climate and high altitude. Yak skeletal muscle myoblasts, which have evolved to thrive under these challenging conditions, offer a valuable model for investigating muscle development. In this study, we performed transcriptome profiling of yak longissimus dorsi muscle at different growth stages, identifying a key long non-coding RNA, LncRNA-XR_314844 (Lnc-MEG8), with a potential role in muscle development.ResultsWe developed a novel technique to isolate high-quality yak myoblasts, enabling detailed analysis of Lnc-MEG8. Our results indicated that Lnc-MEG8's subcellular localization varies during muscle cell growth: it is found in both the nucleus and cytoplasm during proliferation but shifts mainly to the cytoplasm during differentiation. Functional experiments showed that Lnc-MEG8 promotes cell proliferation and inhibits differentiation, while its silencing had the opposite effect. Further analysis revealed that both Lnc-MEG8 and the gene RTL1 share miR-22-3p as a common target. Dual-luciferase assays confirmed miR-22-3p directly targets both Lnc-MEG8 and RTL1 mRNA. Co-transfection of Lnc-MEG8 and a miR-22-3p mimic restored RTL1 expression, highlighting Lnc-MEG8's regulatory role. Lnc-MEG8 also counteracts miR-22-3p's suppression of key muscle genes such as MyF5 and MyoG, facilitating myotube formation.ConclusionThese findings demonstrate that the Lnc-MEG8-miR-22-3p-RTL1 axis plays a crucial role in yak muscle development, providing insights that could advance muscle tissue engineering and enhance yak meat quality.
As a Brassica crop, Brassica napus typically has single flowers that contain four petals. The double-flower phenotype of rapeseed has been a desirable trait in China because of its potential commercial value in ornamental tourism. However, few double-flowered germplasms have been documented in B. napus, and knowledge of the underlying genes is limited. Here, B. napus D376 was characterized as a double-flowered strain that presented an average of 10.92 +/- 1.40 petals and other normal floral organs. F-1, F-2 and BC1 populations were constructed by crossing D376 with a single-flowered line reciprocally. Genetic analysis revealed that the double-flower trait was a recessive trait controlled by multiple genes. To identify the key genes controlling the double-flower trait, bulk segregant analysis sequencing (BSA-seq) and RNA-seq analyses were conducted on F-2 individual bulks with opposite extreme phenotypes. Through BSA-seq, one candidate interval was mapped at the region of chromosome C05: 14.56-16.17 Mb. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses revealed that the DEGs were significantly enriched in carbohydrate metabolic processes, notably starch and sucrose metabolism. Interestingly, five and thirty-six DEGs associated with floral development were significantly up- and down-regulated, respectively, in the double-flowered plants. A combined analysis of BSA-seq and RNA-seq data revealed that five genes were candidates associated with the double flower trait, and BnaC05.ERS2 was the most promising gene. These findings provide novel insights into the breeding of double-flowered varieties and lay a theoretical foundation for unveiling the molecular mechanisms of floral development in B. napus.
BackgroundJackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam.) is the world's largest and heaviest fruit and adapts to hot, humid tropical climates. Low-temperature injury in winter is a primary abiotic stress, which affects jackfruit growth and development. Therefore, breeding cold-resistant varieties and identifying the vital genes in the process of cold resistance are essential. The dehydration-responsive element binding (DREB) gene family is among the subfamily of the APETALA2/ethylene response factor transcription factor family and is significant in plant abiotic stress responses.MethodsIn this study, a comparative analysis of the cold resistance property of 'GuangXi' ('GX') and 'Thailand' ('THA') jackfruit strains with different cold resistance characteristics was performed through chlorophyll fluorescence and transcriptome sequencing.ResultsWe found that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) are significantly enriched in the metabolic processes. Here, 93 DREB genes were identified in the jackfruit genome, and phylogenetic analysis was used to classify them into seven groups. Gene structure, conserved motifs, chromosomal location, and homologous relationships were used to analyze the structural characteristics of the DREB family. Transcriptomics indicated that most of the AhDREB genes exhibited down-regulated expression in 'THA.' The DEGs AhDREB12, AhDREB21, AhDREB29, and AhDREB34 were selected for quantitative real-time PCR, and the results showed that these genes also had down-regulated expression in 'THA.'ConclusionsThe above results suggest the significance of the DREB family in improving the cold resistance property of 'GX.'
Background The Domain of unknown function 679 membrane protein (DMP) family, which is unique to plants, plays a crucial role in reproductive development, stress response and aging. A comprehensive study was conducted to identify the DMP gene members of oat (Avena sativa) and to investigate their structural features and tissue-specific expression profiles. Utilizing whole genome and transcriptome data, we analyzed the physicochemical properties, gene structure, cis-acting elements, phylogenetic relationships, conserved structural (CS) domains, CS motifs and expression patterns of the AsDMP family in A. sativa. Results The DMP family genes of A. sativa were distributed across 17 chromosomal scaffolds, encompassing a total of 33 members. Based on phylogenetic relationships, the AsDMP genes were classified into five distinct subfamilies. The gene structure also suggests that A. sativa may have undergone an intron loss event during its evolution. Covariance analysis indicates that genome-wide duplication and segmental duplication may be the major contributor to the expansion of the AsDMP gene family. Ka/Ks selective pressure analysis of the AsDMP gene family suggests that DMP gene pairs are generally conserved over evolutionary time. The upstream promoters of these genes contain several cis-acting elements, suggesting a potential role in abiotic stress responses and hormone induction. Transcriptome data revealed that the expression patterns of the DMP genes are involved in tissue and organ development. In this study, the AsDMP genes (AsDMP1, AsDMP19, and AsDMP22) were identified as potential regulators of seed senescence in A. sativa. These genes could serve as candidates for breeding studies focused on seed longevity and anti-aging germplasm in A. sativa. The study provides valuable insights into the regulatory mechanisms of the AsDMP gene family in the aging process of A. sativa germplasm and offers theoretical support for further function investigation into the functions of AsDMP genes and the molecular mechanisms underlying seed anti-aging. Conclusions This study identified the AsDMP genes as being involved in the aging process of A. sativa seeds, marking the first report on the potential role of DMP genes in seed aging for A. sativa.
Plague, as an ancient zoonotic disease caused by Yersinia pestis, has brought great disasters. The natural plague focus of Marmota himalayana in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau is the largest, which has been constantly active and the leading source of human plague in China for decades. Understanding the population genetics of M. himalayana and relating that information to the biogeographic distribution of Yersinia pestis and plague outbreaks are greatly beneficial for the knowledge of plague spillover and arecrucial for pandemic prevention. In the present research, we assessed the population genetics of M. himalayana. We carried out a comparative study of plague outbreaks and the population genetics of M. himalayana on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. We found that M. himalayana populations are divided into two main clusters located in the south and north of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Fourteen DFR genomovars of Y. pestis were found and exhibited a significant region-specific distribution. Additionally, the increased genetic diversity of plague hosts is positively associated with human plague outbreaks. This insight gained can improve our understanding of biodiversity for pathogen spillover and provide municipally directed targets for One Health surveillance development, which will be an informative next step toward increased monitoring of M. himalayana dynamics.
UDP-glycosyltransferases (UGTs) widely exist in plants and play essential roles in catalyzing the glycosylation reaction associated with metabolic processes. UGT gene family has been identified in many species to date. However, the comprehensive identification and systematic analysis have not been documented yet in the latest potato genome. In this study, a total of 295 UGT members (StUGT) were identified and found to be unevenly distributed on twelve chromosomes of potato. All StUGT genes were classified into 17 groups (A-P, R) and the UGT genes within the same groups have similar structural characterization. Tandem duplication was the major driving force for the StUGT gene expansion. The prediction of cis-acting elements showed that the development process, light, phytohormone, and abiotic stress-responsive elements generally existed in StUGT promoter regions. Analysis of spatial and temporal expression patterns demonstrated that StUGT genes were widely and differentially expressed in various tissues. Additionally, to investigate the salt stress-responsive genes, we analyzed the expression profiles of the StUGT genes under salt treatment. A total of 50 and 20 StUGT genes were continuously up- and down-regulated, respectively, implicating that these genes were involved in the regulation of salt tolerance. Among them, the StUGT178 gene, which was significantly induced by salt stress and contains salt-responsive element, was considered as one of the most relevant candidate genes. Transient transformation of the StUGT178 promoter in tobacco revealed that the transcriptional activation activity of the StUGT178 gene was strengthened under salt treatment. Furthermore, the heterologous expressions of the promoter and coding protein of the StUGT178 gene in Arabidopsis further demonstrated that the StUGT178 gene significantly responds to salt treatment, and enhanced salinity tolerance by regulating antioxidant enzyme activity and H2O2 accumulation. These results provide comprehensive information for a better understanding of the StUGT genes and offer a foundation for uncovering their function associated with salt stress in potato.
BackgroundStudies have confirmed that Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus (IBRV) infection induces mitochondrial damage. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of noncoding RNA molecules, which are involved in various biological processes and pathological changes associated with mitochondrial damage. It is currently unclear whether miRNAs participate in IBRV-induced mitochondrial damage in Madin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells.ResultsIn the present study, we used high-throughput sequencing technology, Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis to screen for mitochondria-related miRNAs and messenger RNAs (mRNAs). In total, 279 differentially expressed miRNAs and 832 differentially expressed mRNAs were identified in 6 hours (IBRV1) versus 24 hours (IBRV2) after IBRV infection in MDBK cells. GO and KEGG enrichment analysis revealed that 42 differentially expressed mRNAs and 348 target genes of differentially expressed miRNAs were correlated with mitochondrial damage, and the miRNA-mitochondria-related target genes regulatory network was constructed to elucidate their potential regulatory relationships. Among the 10 differentially expressed miRNAs, 8 showed expression patterns consistent with the high-throughput sequencing results. Functional validation results showed that overexpression of miR-10a and miR-182 aggravated mitochondrial damage, while inhibition of miR-10a and miR-182 alleviated mitochondrial damage.ConclusionsThis study not only revealed the expression changes of miRNAs and mRNAs in IBRV-infected MDBK cells, but also revealed possible biological regulatory relationship between them. MiR-10a and miR-182 may have the potential to be developed as biomarkers for the diagnosis and treatment of IBRV. Together, Together, these data and analyses provide additional insights into the roles of miRNA and mRNA in IBRV-induced mitochondria damage
BackgroundDorper and Tan sheep are renowned for their rapid growth and exceptional meat quality, respectively. Previous research has provided evidence of the impact of gut microbiota on breed characteristics. The precise correlation between the gastrointestinal tract and peripheral organs in each breed is still unclear. Investigating the metabolic network of the intestinal organ has the potential to improve animal growth performance and enhance economic benefits through the regulation of intestinal metabolites.ResultsIn this study, we identified the growth advantage of Dorper sheep and the high fat content of Tan sheep. A transcriptome study of the brain, liver, skeletal muscle, and intestinal tissues of both breeds revealed 3,750 differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The genes PPARGC1A, LPL, and PHGDH were found to be highly expressed in Doper, resulting in the up-regulation of pathways related to lipid oxidation, glycerophospholipid metabolism, and amino acid anabolism. Tan sheep highly express the BSEP, LDLR, and ACHE genes, which up-regulate the pathways involved in bile transport and cholesterol homeostasis. Hindgut content analysis identified 200 differentially accumulated metabolites (DAMs). Purines, pyrimidines, bile acids, and fatty acid substances were more abundant in Dorper sheep. Based on combined gene and metabolite analyses, we have identified glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism, tryptophan metabolism, bile secretion, cholesterol metabolism, and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction as key factors contributing to the differences among the breeds.ConclusionsThis study indicates that different breeds of sheep exhibit unique breed characteristics through various physiological regulatory methods. Dorper sheep upregulate metabolic signals related to glycine, serine, and threonine, resulting in an increase in purine and pyrimidine substances. This, in turn, promotes the synthesis of amino acids and facilitates body development, resulting in a faster rate of weight gain. Tan sheep accelerate bile transport, reduce bile accumulation in the intestine, and upregulate cholesterol homeostasis signals in skeletal muscles. This promotes the accumulation of peripheral and intramuscular fat, resulting in improved meat quality. This work adopts a joint analysis method of multi-tissue transcriptome and gut metabolome, providing a successful case for analyzing the mechanisms underlying the formation of various traits.
Background Advances of spatial transcriptomics technologies enabled simultaneously profiling gene expression and spatial locations of cells from the same tissue. Computational tools and approaches for integration of transcriptomics data and spatial context information are urgently needed to comprehensively explore the underlying structure patterns. In this manuscript, we propose HyperGCN for the integrative analysis of gene expression and spatial information profiled from the same tissue. HyperGCN enables data visualization and clustering, and facilitates downstream analysis, including domain segmentation, the characterization of marker genes for the specific domain structure and GO enrichment analysis.Results Extensive experiments are implemented on four real datasets from different tissues (including human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, human positive breast tumors, mouse brain, mouse olfactory bulb tissue and Zabrafish melanoma) and technologies (including 10X visium, osmFISH, seqFISH+, 10X Xenium and Stereo-seq) with different spatial resolutions. The results show that HyperGCN achieves superior clustering performance and produces good domain segmentation effects while identifies biologically meaningful spatial expression patterns. This study provides a flexible framework to analyze spatial transcriptomics data with high geometric complexity.Conclusions HyperGCN is an unsupervised method based on hypergraph induced graph convolutional network, where it assumes that there existed disjoint tissues with high geometric complexity, and models the semantic relationship of cells through hypergraph, which better tackles the high-order interactions of cells and levels of noise in spatial transcriptomics data.
Development of the human pancreas requires the precise temporal control of gene expression via epigenetic mechanisms and the binding of key transcription factors. We quantified genome-wide patterns of DNA methylation in human fetal pancreatic samples from donors aged 6 to 21 post-conception weeks. We found dramatic changes in DNA methylation across pancreas development, with > 21% of sites characterized as developmental differentially methylated positions (dDMPs) including many annotated to genes associated with monogenic diabetes. An analysis of DNA methylation in postnatal pancreas tissue showed that the dramatic temporal changes in DNA methylation occurring in the developing pancreas are largely limited to the prenatal period. Significant differences in DNA methylation were observed between males and females at a number of autosomal sites, with a small proportion of sites showing sex-specific DNA methylation trajectories across pancreas development. Pancreas dDMPs were not distributed equally across the genome and were depleted in regulatory domains characterized by open chromatin and the binding of known pancreatic development transcription factors. Finally, we compared our pancreas dDMPs to previous findings from the human brain, identifying evidence for tissue-specific developmental changes in DNA methylation. This study represents the first systematic exploration of DNA methylation patterns during human fetal pancreas development and confirms the prenatal period as a time of major epigenomic plasticity.
Background There is increasing interest in using intestinal organoids to study complex traits like feed efficiency (FE) and host-microbe interactions. The aim of this study was to investigate differences in the molecular phenotype of organoids derived from pigs divergent for FE as well as their responses to challenge with adherent and invasive Escherichia coli (E. coli). Results Colon and ileum tissue from low and high FE pigs was used to generate 3D organoids and two dimensional (2D) monolayers of organoid cells for E. coli challenge. Genome-wide gene expression was used to investigate molecular differences between pigs that were phenotypically divergent for FE and to study the difference in gene expression after challenge with E. coli. We showed, (1) minor differences in gene expression of colon organoids from pigs with low and high FE phenotypes, (2) that an E. coli challenge results in a strong innate immune gene response in both colon and ileum organoids, (3) that the immune response seems to be less pronounced in the colon organoids of high FE pigs and (4) a slightly stronger immune response was observed in ileum than in colon organoids. Conclusions These findings demonstrate the potential for using organoids to gain insights into complex biological mechanisms such as FE.
BackgroundEcholocation was a key development in toothed whale evolution, enabling their adaptation and diversification across various environments. Previous bioacoustic and morphological studies suggest that environmental pressures have influenced the evolution of echolocation in toothed whales. This hypothesis demands further investigation, especially regarding the molecular mechanisms involved in the adaptive radiation of toothed whales across multiple habitats. Here we show that the coding sequences of four hearing genes involved in echolocation (CDH23, prestin, TMC1, and CLDN14) have different signatures of molecular evolution among riverine, coastal, and oceanic dolphins, suggesting that the evolutionary constraints of these habitats shaped the underlying genetic diversity of the toothed whale sonar.ResultsOur comparative analysis across 37 odontocete species revealed patterns of accelerated evolution within coastal and riverine lineages, supporting the hypothesis that shallow habitats pose specific selective pressures to sonar propagation, which are not found in the deep ocean. All toothed whales with genes evolving under positive selection are shallow coastal species, including three species that have recently diverged from freshwater lineages (Cephalorhynchus commersonii, Sotalia guianensis, and Orcaella heinsohni - CDH23), and three species that operate specialized Narrow Band High Frequency (NBHF) Sonars (Phocoena sinus - prestin, Neophocaena phocaenoides - TMC1 and Cephalorhynchus commersonii - CDH23). For river dolphins and deep-diving toothed whales, we found signatures of positive selection and molecular convergence affecting specific sites on CDH23, TMC1, and prestin. Positively selected sites (PSS) were different in number, identity, and substitution rates (dN/dS) across riverine, coastal, and oceanic toothed whales.ConclusionHere we shed light on potential molecular mechanisms underlying the diversification of toothed whale echolocation. Our results suggest that toothed whale hearing genes changed under different selective pressures in coastal, riverine, and oceanic environments.
Introduction Black pepper (Piper nigrum L.) is a non-model spice crop of significant agricultural and biological importance. The 'quick wilt' disease caused by the oomycete Phytophthora capsici is a major threat, leading to substantial crop loss. The molecular mechanisms governing the plant immune responses to this pathogen remain unclear. This study employs RNA sequencing and transcriptome analysis to explore the defense mechanisms of P. nigrum against P. capsici. Results Two-month-old P. nigrum plantlets were subjected to infection with P. capsici, and leaf samples were collected at 6- and 12-hours post-inoculation. RNA was extracted, sequenced, and the resulting data were processed and assembled. Differential gene expression analysis was conducted to identify genes responding to the infection. Additionally, the study investigated the involvement of Salicylic acid (SA), Jasmonic acid (JA), and Ethylene (ET) signalling pathways. Our transcriptome assembly comprised 64,667 transcripts with 96.7% completeness, providing valuable insights into the P. nigrum transcriptome. Annotation of these transcripts identified functional categories and domains, provided details on molecular processes. Gene expression analysis identified 4,714 transcripts at 6 h post-infection (hpi) and 9,416 at 12 hpi as differentially expressed, revealing dynamic regulation of immune-related genes. Furthermore, the study investigated key genes involved in biosynthesis pathways of Salicylic acid, Jasmonic acid, and Ethylene signalling. Notably, we found differential regulation of critical genes associated with these pathways while comparing data before and after infection, thereby shedding light on their roles in defense mechanism in P. nigrum defense. Conclusions This comprehensive transcriptome analysis of P. nigrum response to P. capsici attack provides valuable insights into the plant defense mechanisms. The dynamic regulation of innate immunity and the involvement of key signalling pathways highlight the complexity of the plant-pathogen interaction. This study contributes to our understanding of plant immunity and offers potential strategies for enhancing P. nigrum resistance to this harmful pathogen.
Background The Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-Kit(+) (LSK) fraction of the bone marrow (BM) comprises multipotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which are vital to tissue homeostasis and vascular repair. While diabetes affects HSC homeostasis overall, the molecular signature of mRNA and miRNA transcriptomic under the conditions of long-standing type 2 diabetes (T2D;>6 months) remains unexplored. Methods In this study, we assessed the transcriptomic signature of HSCs in db/db mice, a well-known and widely used model for T2D. LSK cells of db/db mice enriched using a cell sorter were subjected to paired-end mRNA and single-end miRNA seq library and sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq 6000. The mRNA sequence reads were mapped using STAR (Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Reference), and the miRNA sequence reads were mapped to the designated reference genome using the Qiagen GeneGlobe RNA-seq Analysis Portal with default parameters for miRNA. Results We uncovered 2076 out of 13,708 mRNAs and 35 out of 191 miRNAs that were expressed significantly in db/db animals; strikingly, previously unreported miRNAs (miR-3968 and miR-1971) were found to be downregulated in db/db mice. Furthermore, we observed a molecular shift in the transcriptome of HSCs of diabetes with an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines (Il4, Tlr4, and Tnf11 alpha) and a decrease in anti-inflammatory cytokine IL10. Pathway mapping demonstrated inflammation mediated by chemokine, cytokine, and angiogenesis as one of the top pathways with a significantly higher number of transcripts in db/db mice. These molecular changes were reflected in an overt defect in LSK mobility in the bone marrow. miRNA downstream target analysis unveils several mRNAs targeting leukocyte migration, microglia activation, phagosome formation, and macrophage activation signaling as their primary pathways, suggesting a shift to an inflammatory phenotype. Conclusion Our findings highlight that chronic diabetes adversely alters HSCs' homeostasis at the transcriptional level, thus potentially contributing to the inflammatory phenotype of HSCs under long-term diabetes. We also believe that identifying HSCs-based biomarkers in miRNAs or mRNAs could serve as diagnostic markers and potential therapeutic targets for diabetes and associated vascular complications.
Background Bisphenol S (BPS) is a substitute for bisphenol A in plastic manufacturing and, as a potential endocrine disruptor, may alter the physiology of the oviduct, in which fertilization and early embryo development take place in mammals. The objective of this study was to assess the effect of a daily dietary exposure to BPS combined with a contrasted diet on the oviduct fluid proteome using an ovine model.Results Eighty adult cyclic ewes were allotted to four groups (20/group): overfed (OF) consuming 50 mu g/kg/day of BPS in their diet, underfed (UF) consuming 50 mu g/kg/day of BPS, and non-exposed controls in each diet group. After three months, the mean body condition score, plasma levels of glucose and non-esterified fatty acids were significantly higher in OF than in UF females. The proteins in collected OF samples (50 mu g) were analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS). Overall, 1563 proteins were identified, among which 848 were quantified. Principal component analysis of the data revealed a clear discrimination of samples according to the diet and a segregation between BPS-exposed and non-exposed females in overfed ewes. Hierarchical clustering of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) identified two clusters of 101 and 78 DAPs according to the diet. Pairwise comparisons between groups revealed a stronger effect of BPS in OF than in UF females (70 vs. 24 DAPs) and a stronger effect of the diet in BPS-exposed than non-exposed females (56 vs. 36 DAPs). Functional analysis of DAPs showed an enrichment in metabolic processes, immune system, cell response to stress, and reproductive processes.Conclusions This work highlights for the first time the important impact of BPS on the oviduct proteome, with larger effects seen in OF than UF females. These results, together with previous ones, raise health concerns for everyone and call for a greater regulation of BPS in the food industry.
BackgroundOver the course of evolution, insects have seen drastic changes in their mode of development. While insects with derived modes of development have been studied extensively, information on ancestral modes of development is lacking. To address this, we selected a member of one of the earliest lineages of extant flying insects, serving as an outgroup to the modern winged insects, the short germ, non-model mayfly Ephemera vulgata Linnaeus (Insecta: Ephemeroptera, Ephemeridae). We document the embryonic morphology throughout its development and establish a global temporal expression atlas.ResultsDAPI staining was used to visualise developmental morphology to provide a frame of reference for the sequenced timepoints. A transcriptome was assembled from 3.2 billion Illumina RNAseq reads divided in 12 timepoints with 3 replicates per timepoint consisting of 35,091 putative genes. We identified 6,091 significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and analysed them for broad expression patterns via gene ontology (GO) as well as for specific genes of interest. This revealed a U-shaped relationship between the sum of DEGs and developmental timepoints, over time, with the lowest number of DEGs at 72 hours after egg laying (hAEL). Based on a principal component analysis of sequenced timepoints, overall development could be divided into four stages, with a transcriptional turning point around katatrepsis. Expression patterns of zld and smg showed a persistent negative correlation and revealed the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT), occurring 24 hAEL. The onset of development of some major anatomical structures, including the head, body, respiratory system, limb, muscle, and eye, are reported. Finally, we show that the ancestral short germ sequential mode of segmentation translates to a sequential Hox gene activation and find diverging expression patterns for lab and pb. We incorporate these patterns and morphological observations to an overview of the developmental timeline.ConclusionsWith our comprehensive differential expression study, we demonstrate the versatility of our global temporal expression atlas. It has the capacity to contribute significantly to phylogenetic insights in early-diverging insect developmental biology and can be deployed in both molecular and genomic applications for future research.
BackgroundIn recent years, interest has grown in quantifying resilience in livestock by examining deviations in target phenotypes. This method is based on the idea that variability in these phenotypes reflects an animal's ability to adapt to external factors. By utilizing routinely collected time-series feed intake data in pigs, researchers can obtain a broad measure of resilience. This measure extends beyond specific conditions, capturing the impact of various unknown external factors that influence phenotype variations. Importantly, this method does not require additional phenotyping investments. Despite growing interest, the relationship between resilience indicators-calculated as deviations from longitudinally recorded target traits-and the mean of those traits remains largely unexplored. This gap raises the risk of inadvertently selecting for the mean rather than accurately capturing true resilience. Additionally, distinguishing between random phenotype fluctuations (white noise) and structural variations linked to resilience poses a challenge. With the aim of developing general resilience indicators applicable to commercial swine populations, we devised four resilience indicators utilizing daily feed consumption as the target trait. These include a canonical resilience indicator (BALnVar) and three novel ones (BAMaxArea, SPLnVar, and SPMaxArea), designed to minimize noise and ensure independence from daily feed consumption. We subsequently integrated these indicators with Whole Genome Sequencing using SLEMM algorithm, data from 1,250 animals to assess their efficacy in capturing resilience and their independence from the mean of daily feed consumption.ResultsOur findings revealed that conventional resilience indicators failed to differentiate from the mean of daily feed consumption, underscoring potential limitations in accurately capturing true resilience. Notably, significant associations involving conventional resilience indicators were identified on chromosome 1, which is commonly linked to body weight.ConclusionWe observed that deviations in feed consumption can effectively serve as indicators for selecting resilience in commercial pig farming, as confirmed by the identification of genes such as PKN1 and GYPC. However, the identification of other genes, such as RNF152, related to growth, suggests that common resilience quantification methods may be more closely related to the mean of daily feed consumption rather than capturing true resilience.
BackgroundNeither a TYRP1-mediated highly conserved genetic network underlying skin color towards optimum defense nor the pathological tendency of its mutation is well understood. The Oujiang Color Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio var. color) as a model organism, offering valuable insights into genetics, coloration, aquaculture practices, and environmental health. Here, we performed a comparative skin transcriptome analysis on TYRP1 mutant and wild fishes by applying a conservative categorical approach considering different color phenotypes.ResultsOur results reveal that an unusual color phenotype may be sensitized with TYRP1 mutation as a result of upregulating several genes related to an anti-inflammatory autoimmune system in response to the COMT-mediated catecholamine neurotransmitters in the skin. Particularly, catecholamines-derived red/brown, red with blue colored membrane attack complex, and brown/grey colored reduced eumelanin are expected to be aggregated in the regenerated cells.ConclusionsIt is, thus, concluded that the regenerated cells with catecholamines, membrane attack complex, and eumelanin altogether may contribute to the formation of the unusual (coffee-like) color phenotype in TYRP1 mutant.
BackgroundDespite the many cheap and fast ways to generate genomic data, good and exact genome assembly is still a problem, with especially the repeats being vastly underrepresented and often misassembled. As short reads in low coverage are already sufficient to represent the repeat landscape of any given genome, many read cluster algorithms were brought forward that provide repeat identification and classification. But how can trustworthy, reliable and representative repeat consensuses be derived from unassembled genomes?ResultsHere, we combine methods from repeat identification and genome assembly to derive these robust consensuses. We test several use cases, such as (1) consensus building from clustered short reads of non-model genomes, (2) from genome-wide amplification setups, and (3) specific repeat-centred questions, such as the linked vs. unlinked arrangement of ribosomal genes. In all our use cases, the derived consensuses are robust and representative. To evaluate overall performance, we compare our high-fidelity repeat consensuses to RepeatExplorer2-derived contigs and check, if they represent real transposable elements as found in long reads. Our results demonstrate that it is possible to generate useful, reliable and trustworthy consensuses from short reads by a combination from read cluster and genome assembly methods in an automatable way.ConclusionWe anticipate that our workflow opens the way towards more efficient and less manual repeat characterization and annotation, benefitting all genome studies, but especially those of non-model organisms.
Background Sequencing and annotating genomes of non-model organisms helps to understand genome architecture, the genetic processes underlying species traits, and how these genes have evolved in closely-related taxa, among many other biological processes. However, many metazoan groups, such as the extremely diverse molluscs, are still underrepresented in the number of sequenced and annotated genomes. Although sequencing techniques have recently improved in quality and quantity, molluscs are still neglected due to difficulties in applying standardized protocols for obtaining genomic data. Results In this study, we present the chromosome-level genome assembly and annotation of the sacoglossan sea slug species Elysia timida, known for its ability to store the chloroplasts of its food algae. In particular, by optimizing the long-read and chromosome conformation capture library preparations, the genome assembly was performed using PacBio HiFi and Arima HiC data. The scaffold and contig N50s, at 41.8 Mb and 1.92 Mb, respectively, are approximately 30-fold and fourfold higher compared to other published sacoglossan genome assemblies. Structural annotation resulted in 19,904 protein-coding genes, which are more contiguous and complete compared to publicly available annotations of Sacoglossa with respect to metazoan BUSCOs. We found no evidence for horizontal gene transfer (HGT), i.e. no photosynthetic genes encoded in the sacoglossan nucleus genome. However, we detected genes encoding polyketide synthases in E. timida, indicating that polypropionates are produced. HPLC-MS/MS analysis confirmed the presence of a large number of polypropionates, including known and yet uncharacterised compounds. Conclusions We can show that our methodological approach helps to obtain a high-quality genome assembly even for a "difficult-to-sequence" organism, which may facilitate genome sequencing in molluscs. This will enable a better understanding of complex biological processes in molluscs, such as functional kleptoplasty in Sacoglossa, by significantly improving the quality of genome assemblies and annotations.
Background Cannabis sativa is seeing a global resurgence as a food, fiber and medicinal crop for industrial hemp and medicinal Cannabis industries respectively. However, a widespread moratorium on the use and research of C. sativa throughout most of the 20th century has seen the development of improved cultivars for specific end uses lag behind that of conventional crops. While C. sativa research and development has seen significant investments in the recent past, resulting in a suite of publicly available genomic resources and tools, a versatile and cost-effective mid-density genotyping platform for applied purposes in breeding and pre-breeding is lacking. Here we report on a first mid-density fixed-target SNP platform for C. sativa. Results The High-throughput Amplicon-based SNP-platform for medicinal Cannabis and industrial Hemp (HASCH) was designed using a combination of filtering and Integer Linear Programming on publicly available whole-genome sequencing and RNA sequencing data, supplemented with in-house generated genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) data. HASCH contains 1,504 genome-wide targets of high call rate (97% mean) and even distribution across the genome, designed to be highly informative (> 0.3 minor allele frequency) across both medicinal cannabis and industrial hemp gene pools. Average numbers of mismatch SNP between any two accessions were 251 for medicinal cannabis (N = 116) and 272 for industrial hemp (N = 87). Comparing HASCH data with corresponding GBS data on a collection of diverse C. sativa accessions demonstrated high concordance and resulted in comparable phylogenies and genetic distance matrices. Using HASCH on a segregating F2 population derived from a cross between a tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-dominant and a cannabidiol (CBD)-dominant accession resulted in a genetic map consisting of 310 markers, comprising 10 linkage groups and a total size of 582.7 cM. Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) mapping identified a major QTL for CBD content on chromosome 7, consistent with previous findings. Conclusion HASCH constitutes a versatile, easy to use and cost-effective genotyping solution for the rapidly growing Cannabis research community. It provides consistent genetic fingerprints of 1504 SNPs with wide applicability genetic resource management, quantitative genetics and breeding.
BackgroudElephant grass (Cenchrus purpureus) is a perennial forage grass characterized by tall plants, high biomass and wide adaptability. Low-temperature stress severely limits elephant grass biomass and geographic distribution. WRKY is one of the largest families of plant-specific transcription factors and plays important roles in plant resistance to low-temperature. However, the understanding of the WRKY family in grasses is limited. In this study, we conducted a genome-wide characterization of WRKY proteins in elephant grass, including gene structure, phylogeny, expression, conserved motif organization, and functional annotation, to identify key CpWRKY candidates involved in cold tolerance.ResultsIn this study, a total of 176 WRKY genes were identified in elephant grass. It was found that 172 were unevenly distributed across its 14 chromosomes, while the remaining 4 genes were not anchored to any chromosome. The genes were classified into three groups based on their WRKY conserved domains and zinc finger motifs. There were 12, 8, 19, 27, 12, 18 and 80 CpWRKYs belonging to group I, group IIa, group IIb, group IIc, group IId, group IIe and group III, respectively. We hypothesized that the ancient subgroup IIc WRKY gene is the ancestor of all WRKY genes in elephant grass. Most CpWRKYs in the same group have similar structure and motif composition. A total of 169 duplicate gene pairs were identified, suggesting that segmental duplication might have contributed to the expansion of the CpWRKY gene family. Ka/Ks analysis revealed that most of the CpWRKYs were subjected to purifying selection during the evolution. It was also found that six genes (CpWRKY51, CpWRKY81, CpWRKY100, CpWRKY101, CpWRKY140 and CpWRKY143) exhibited higher expression in roots compare to leaves, and were significantly induced by low temperature stress. Among them, CpWRKY81 had the highest expression under low-temperature stress, and its over-expression significantly enhanced the cold tolerance in yeast.ConlusionsIn this study, we characterized WRKY genes in elephant grass and further investigated their physicochemical properties, evolution, and expression patterns under low-temperature stress. This research provides valuable resources for identifying key CpWRKY genes that contribute to cold tolerance in elephant grass.
BackgroundThe Nakaseomyces clade is formed by at least nine described species among which three can be pathogenic to humans, namely Nakaseomyces glabratus (Candida glabrata), the second most-common cause of candidiasis worldwide, and two rarer emerging pathogens: Nakaseomyces (Candida) nivarensis and Nakaseomyces (Candida) bracarensis. Early comparative genomics analyses identified parallel expansions of subtelomeric adhesin genes in N. glabratus and N. nivarensis/bracarensis, and suggested possible links with the emergence of the virulence potential in these species. However, as shown for N. glabratus, the proper assessment of subtelomeric genes is hindered by the use of incomplete assemblies and reliance on a single isolate.ResultsHere we sequenced seven N. bracarensis isolates and reconstructed chromosome level assemblies of two divergent strains. We show that N. bracarensis isolates belong to two diverging clades that have slightly different genomic structures. We identified the set of encoded adhesins in the two complete assemblies, and uncovered the presence of a novel adhesin motif, found mainly in N. bracarensis. Our analysis revealed a larger adhesin content in N. bracarensis than previously reported, and similar in size to that of N. glabratus. We confirm the independent adhesin expansion in these two species, which could relate to their different levels of virulence.ConclusionN. bracarensis clinical isolates belong to at least two differentiated clades. We describe a novel repeat motif found in N. bracarensis adhesins, which helps in their identification. Adhesins underwent independent expansions in N. glabratus and N. bracarensis, leading to repertoires that are qualitatively different but quantitatively similar. Given that adhesins are considered virulence factors, some of the observed differences could contribute to variations in virulence capabilities between N. glabratus and N. bracarensis.
BackgroundBeyond the massive amounts of DNA and genes transferred from the protoorganelle genome to the nucleus during the endosymbiotic event that gave rise to the plastids, stretches of plastid DNA of varying size are still being copied and relocated to the nuclear genome in a process that is ongoing and does not result in the concomitant shrinking of the plastid genome. As a result, plant nuclear genomes feature small, but variable, fraction of their genomes of plastid origin, the so-called nuclear plastid DNA sequences (NUPTs). However, the mechanisms underlying the origin and fixation of NUPTs are not yet fully elucidated and research on the topic has been mostly focused on a limited number of species and of plastid DNA.ResultsHere, we leveraged a chromosome-scale version of the genome of the orphan crop Moringa oleifera, which features the largest fraction of plastid DNA in any plant nuclear genome known so far, to gain insights into the mechanisms of origin of NUPTs. For this purpose, we examined the chromosomal distribution and arrangement of NUPTs, we explicitly modeled and tested the correlation between their age and size distribution, we characterized their sites of origin at the chloroplast genome and their sites of insertion at the nuclear one, as well as we investigated their arrangement in clusters. We found a bimodal distribution of NUPT relative ages, which implies NUPTs in moringa were formed through two separate events. Furthermore, NUPTs from every event showed markedly distinctive features, suggesting they originated through distinct mechanisms.ConclusionsOur results reveal an unanticipated complexity of the mechanisms at the origin of NUPTs and of the evolutionary forces behind their fixation and highlight moringa species as an exceptional model to assess the impact of plastid DNA in the evolution of the architecture and function of plant nuclear genomes.
BackgroundThe ongoing evolution of the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies has led to the production of genomic data on a massive scale. While tools for genomic data integration and analysis are becoming increasingly available, the conceptual and analytical complexities still represent a great challenge in many biological contexts.ResultsTo address this issue, we describe a six-steps tutorial for the best practices in genomic data integration, consisting of (1) designing a data matrix; (2) formulating a specific biological question toward data description, selection and prediction; (3) selecting a tool adapted to the targeted questions; (4) preprocessing of the data; (5) conducting preliminary analysis, and finally (6) executing genomic data integration.ConclusionThe tutorial has been tested and demonstrated on publicly available genomic data generated from poplar (Populus L.), a woody plant model. We also developed a new graphical output for the unsupervised multi-block analysis, cimDiablo_v2, available at https://forgemia.inra.fr/umr-gdec/omics-integration-on-poplar, and allowing the selection of master drivers in genomic data variation and interplay.
The Fasin rainbow fish, scientifically named Melanotaenia fasinensis, is highly prized by aquarium enthusiasts for its vibrant colors and adaptability to artificial aquatic environments. This species is endemic to the karst landscape of the Bird's Head region in Papua, Indonesia, and belongs to the family Melanotaeniidae. Discovered relatively recently in 2010, this species was designated as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in 2021. However, there is currently insufficient data regarding its phylogenetic position. To address this gap, our study employed next-generation sequencing (NGS) to analyze the entire mitochondrial genome of M. fasinensis. The mitochondrial genome comprises 13 protein-coding genes, 22 transfer RNA genes, and two ribosomal RNA genes, with a total length of 16,731 base pairs. The base composition of the mitogenome revealed percentages of 27.76% adenine (A), 27.34% thymine (T), 16.15% guanine (G), and 28.75% cytosine (C) residues. Our phylogenetic analysis based on sequence data indicated that all species of the Melanotaeniidae family clustered together on the same branch. Furthermore, the intergeneric and interspecific taxonomic positions were explicit and clear. Phylogenetically, Melanotaeniidae were more closely related to the family Isonidae than to the family Atherinomorus. The phylogenetic position of M. fasinensis was relatively basal within the genus Melanotaenia. This study provides valuable molecular insights for further exploration of the phylogeography and evolutionary history of M. fasinensis and other members of the genus Melanotaenia.
Background Mycoplasma spp. are wall-less bacteria with small genomes (usually 0.5-1.5 Mb). Many Mycoplasma (M.) species are known to colonize the respiratory tract of both humans and livestock animals, where they act as primary pathogens or opportunists. M. equirhinis was described for the first time in 1975 in horses but has been poorly studied since, despite regular reports of around 14% prevalence in equine respiratory disorders. We recently showed that M. equirhinis is not a primary pathogen but could play a role in co-infections of the respiratory tract. This study was a set up to propose the first genomic characterization to better our understanding of the M. equirhinis species. Results Four circularized genomes, two of which were generated here, were compared in terms of synteny, gene content, and specific features associated with virulence or genome plasticity. An additional 20 scaffold-level genomes were used to analyse intra-species diversity through a pangenome phylogenetic approach. The M. equirhinis species showed consistent genomic homogeneity, pointing to potential clonality of isolates despite their varied geographical origins (UK, Japan and various places in France). Three different classes of mobile genetic elements have been detected: insertion sequences related to the IS1634 family, a putative prophage related to M. arthritidis and integrative conjugative elements related to M. arginini. The core genome harbours the typical putative virulence-associated genes of mycoplasmas mainly involved in cytoadherence and immune escape. Conclusion M. equirhinis is a highly syntenic, homogeneous species with a limited repertoire of mobile genetic elements and putative virulence genes.
BackgroundElucidating the intricacies of the sugarcane genome is essential for breeding superior cultivars. This economically important crop originates from hybridizations of highly polyploid Saccharum species. However, the large size (10 Gb), high degree of polyploidy, and aneuploidy of the sugarcane genome pose significant challenges to complete genome sequencing, assembly, and annotation. One successful strategy for identifying candidate genes linked to agronomic traits, particularly those associated with sugar accumulation, leverages synteny and potential collinearity with related species.ResultsIn this study, we explored synteny between sorghum and sugarcane. Genes from a sorghum Brix QTL were used to screen bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) libraries from two Brazilian sugarcane varieties (IACSP93-3046 and SP80-3280). The entire region was successfully recovered, confirming synteny and collinearity between the species. Manual annotation identified 51 genes in the hybrid varieties that were subsequently confirmed to be present in Saccharum spontaneum. This study employed a multifaceted approach to identify candidate genes for sugar accumulation, including retrieving the genomic region of interest, performing a gene-by-gene analysis, analyzing RNA-seq data for internodes from Saccharumofficinarum and S. spontaneum accessions, constructing a coexpression network to examine the expression patterns of genes within the studied region and their neighbors, and finally identifying differentially expressed genes (DEGs).ConclusionsThis comprehensive approach led to the discovery of three candidate genes potentially involved in sugar accumulation: an ethylene-responsive transcription factor (ERF), an ABA 8'-hydroxylase, and a prolyl oligopeptidase (POP). These findings could be valuable for identifying additional candidate genes for other important agricultural traits and directly targeting candidate genes for further work in molecular breeding.
BackgroundSponges (phylum Porifera) constantly interact with microbes. They graze on microbes from the water column by filter-feeding and they harbor symbiotic partners within their bodies. In experimental setups, sponges take up symbionts at lower rates compared with seawater microbes. This suggests that sponges have the capacity to differentiate between microbes and preferentially graze in non-symbiotic microbes, although the underlying mechanisms of discrimination are still poorly understood. Genomic studies showed that, compared to other animal groups, sponges present an extended repertoire of immune receptors, in particular NLRs, SRCRs, and GPCRs, and a handful of experiments showed that sponges regulate the expression of these receptors upon encounter with microbial elicitors. We hypothesize that sponges may rely on differential expression of their diverse repertoire of poriferan immune receptors to sense different microbial consortia while filter-feeding. To test this, we characterized the transcriptomic response of two sponge species, Aplysina aerophoba and Dysidea avara, upon incubation with microbial consortia extracted from A. aerophoba in comparison with incubation with seawater microbes. The sponges were sampled after 1 h, 3 h, and 5 h for RNA-Seq differential gene expression analysis.ResultsD. avara incubated with A. aerophoba-symbionts regulated the expression of genes related to immunity, ubiquitination, and signaling. Within the set of differentially-expressed immune genes we identified different families of Nucleotide Oligomerization Domain (NOD)-Like Receptors (NLRs). These results represent the first experimental evidence that different types of NLRs are involved in microbial discrimination in a sponge. In contrast, the transcriptomic response of A. aerophoba to its own symbionts involved comparatively fewer genes and lacked genes encoding for immune receptors.ConclusionOur work suggests that: (i) the transcriptomic response of sponges upon microbial exposure may imply "fine-tuning" of baseline gene expression as a result of their interaction with microbes, (ii) the differential response of sponges to microbial encounters varied between the species, probably due to species-specific characteristics or related to host's traits, and (iii) immune receptors belonging to different families of NLR-like genes played a role in the differential response to microbes, whether symbionts or food bacteria. The regulation of these receptors in sponges provides further evidence of the potential role of NLRs in invertebrate host-microbe interactions. The study of sponge responses to microbes exemplifies how investigating different animal groups broadens our knowledge of the evolution of immune specificity and symbiosis.
BackgroundCirculating tumour DNA (ctDNA) is a subset of cell free DNA (cfDNA) released by tumour cells into the bloodstream. Circulating tumour DNA has shown great potential as a biomarker to inform treatment in cancer patients. Collecting ctDNA is minimally invasive and reflects the entire genetic makeup of a patient's cancer. ctDNA variants in NGS data can be difficult to distinguish from sequencing and PCR artefacts due to low abundance, particularly in the early stages of cancer. Unique Molecular Identifiers (UMIs) are short sequences ligated to the sequencing library before amplification. These sequences are useful for filtering out low frequency artefacts. The utility of ctDNA as a cancer biomarker depends on accurate detection of cancer variants.ResultsIn this study, we benchmarked six variant calling tools, including two UMI-aware callers for their ability to call ctDNA variants. The standard variant callers tested included Mutect2, bcftools, LoFreq and FreeBayes. The UMI-aware variant callers benchmarked were UMI-VarCal and UMIErrorCorrect. We used both datasets with known variants spiked in at low frequencies, and datasets containing ctDNA, and generated synthetic UMI sequences for these datasets. Variant callers displayed different preferences for sensitivity and specificity. Mutect2 showed high sensitivity, while returning more privately called variants than any other caller in data without synthetic UMIs - an indicator of false positive variant discovery. In data encoded with synthetic UMIs, UMI-VarCal detected fewer putative false positive variants than all other callers in synthetic datasets. Mutect2 showed a balance between high sensitivity and specificity in data encoded with synthetic UMIs.ConclusionsOur results indicate UMI-aware variant callers have potential to improve sensitivity and specificity in calling low frequency ctDNA variants over standard variant calling tools. There is a growing need for further development of UMI-aware variant calling tools if effective early detection methods for cancer using ctDNA samples are to be realised.
BackgroundMosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in leukocytes is the most prevalent somatic aneuploidy in aging humans. Men with LOY have increased risks of all-cause mortality and the major causes of death, including many forms of cancer. It has been suggested that the association between LOY and disease risk depends on what type of leukocyte is affected with Y loss, with prostate cancer patients showing higher levels of LOY in CD4 + T lymphocytes. In previous studies, Y loss has however been observed at relatively low levels in this cell type. This motivated us to investigate whether specific subsets of CD4 + T lymphocytes are particularly affected by LOY. Publicly available, T lymphocyte enriched, single-cell RNA sequencing datasets from patients with liver, lung or colorectal cancer were used to study how LOY affects different subtypes of T lymphocyte. To validate the observations from the public data, we also generated a single-cell RNA sequencing dataset comprised of 23 PBMC samples and 32 CD4 + T lymphocytes enriched samples.ResultsRegulatory T cells had significantly more LOY than any other studied T lymphocytes subtype. Furthermore, LOY in regulatory T cells increased the ratio of regulatory T cells compared with other T lymphocyte subtypes, indicating an effect of Y loss on lymphocyte differentiation. This was supported by developmental trajectory analysis of CD4 + T lymphocytes culminating in the regulatory T cells cluster most heavily affected by LOY. Finally, we identify dysregulation of 465 genes in regulatory T cells with Y loss, many involved in the immunosuppressive functions and development of regulatory T cells.ConclusionsHere, we show that regulatory T cells are particularly affected by Y loss, resulting in an increased fraction of regulatory T cells and dysregulated immune functions. Considering that regulatory T cells plays a critical role in the process of immunosuppression; this enrichment for regulatory T cells with LOY might contribute to the increased risk for cancer observed among men with Y loss in leukocytes.
Background Endophytic bacteria possess a range of unique characteristics that enable them to successfully interact with their host and survive in adverse environments. This study employed in silico analysis to identify genes, from Bacillus sp. strain MHSD_37, with potential biotechnological applications. Results The strain presented several endophytic lifestyle genes which encode for motility, quorum sensing, stress response, desiccation tolerance and root colonisation. The presence of plant growth promoting genes such as those involved in nitrogen fixation, nitrate assimilation, siderophores synthesis, seed germination and promotion of root nodule symbionts, was detected. Strain MHSD_37 also possessed genes involved in insect virulence and evasion of defence system. The genome analysis also identified the presence of genes involved in heavy metal tolerance, xenobiotic resistance, and the synthesis of siderophores involved in heavy metal tolerance. Furthermore, LC-MS analysis of the excretome identified secondary metabolites with biological activities such as anti-cancer, antimicrobial and applications as surfactants. Conclusions Strain MHSD_37 thereby demonstrated potential biotechnological application in bioremediation, biofertilisation and biocontrol. Moreover, the strain presented genes encoding products with potential novel application in bio-nanotechnology and pharmaceuticals.
Background Single-cell transcriptomics provides means to study cell populations at the level of individual cells. In leukocyte biology this approach could potentially aid the identification of subpopulations and functions without the need to develop species-specific reagents. The present study aimed to evaluate single-cell RNA-seq as a tool for identification of chicken peripheral blood leukocytes. For this purpose, purified and thrombocyte depleted leukocytes from 4 clinically healthy hens were subjected to single-cell 3 ' RNA-seq. Bioinformatic analysis of data comprised unsupervised clustering of the cells, and annotation of clusters based on expression profiles. Immunofluorescence phenotyping of the cell preparations used was also performed.
BackgroundBrown algae belong to the Stramenopiles phylum and are phylogenetically distant from plants and other multicellular organisms. This independent evolutionary history has shaped brown algae with numerous metabolic characteristics specific to this group, including the synthesis of peculiar polysaccharides contained in their extracellular matrix (ECM). Alginates and fucose-containing sulphated polysaccharides (FCSPs), the latter including fucans, are the main components of ECMs. However, the metabolic pathways of these polysaccharides remain poorly described due to a lack of genomic data.ResultsAn extensive genomic dataset has been recently released for brown algae and their close sister species, for which we previously performed an expert annotation of key genes involved in ECM-carbohydrate metabolisms. Here we provide a deeper analysis of this set of genes using comparative genomics, phylogenetics analyses, and protein modelling. Two key gene families involved in both the synthesis and degradation of alginate were suggested to have been acquired by the common ancestor of brown algae and their closest sister species Schizocladia ischiensis. Our analysis indicates that this assumption can be extended to additional metabolic steps, and thus to the whole alginate metabolic pathway. The pathway for the biosynthesis of fucans still remains biochemically unresolved and we also investigate putative fucosyltransferase genes that may harbour a fucan synthase activity in brown algae.ConclusionsOur analysis is the first extensive survey of carbohydrate-related enzymes in brown algae, and provides a valuable resource for future research into the glycome and ECM of brown algae. The expansion of specific families related to alginate metabolism may have represented an important prerequisite for the evolution of developmental complexity in brown algae. Our analysis questions the possible occurrence of FCSPs outside brown algae, notably within their closest sister taxon and in other Stramenopiles such as diatoms. Filling this knowledge gap in the future will help determine the origin and evolutionary history of fucan synthesis in eukaryotes.
Background Parasitic nematodes significantly undermine global human and animal health and productivity. Parasite control is reliant on anthelmintic administration however over-use of a limited number of drugs has resulted in escalating parasitic nematode resistance, threatening the sustainability of parasite control and underscoring an urgent need for the development of novel therapeutics. FMRFamide-like peptides (FLPs), the largest family of nematode neuropeptides, modulate nematode behaviours including those important for parasite survival, highlighting FLP receptors (FLP-GPCRs) as appealing putative novel anthelmintic targets. Advances in omics resources have enabled the identification of FLPs and neuropeptide-GPCRs in some parasitic nematodes, but remaining gaps in FLP-ligand libraries hinder the characterisation of receptor-ligand interactions, which are required to drive the development of novel control approaches. Results In this study we exploited recent expansions in nematode genome data to identify 2143 flp-genes in > 100 nematode species across free-living, entomopathogenic, plant, and animal parasitic lifestyles and representing 7 of the 12 major nematode clades. Our data reveal that: (i) the phylum-spanning flps, flp-1, -8, -14, and - 18, may be representative of the flp profile of the last common ancestor of nematodes; (ii) the majority of parasitic nematodes have a reduced flp complement relative to free-living species; (iii) FLP prepropeptide architecture is variable within and between flp-genes and across nematode species; (iv) FLP prepropeptide signatures facilitate flp-gene discrimination; (v) FLP motifs display variable length, amino acid sequence, and conservation; (vi) CLANS analysis provides insight into the evolutionary history of flp-gene sequelogues and reveals putative flp-gene paralogues and, (vii) flp expression is upregulated in the infective larval stage of several nematode parasites. Conclusions These data provide the foundation required for phylum-spanning FLP-GPCR deorphanisation screens in nematodes to seed the discovery and development of novel parasite control approaches.
BackgroundNext-Generation Sequencing (NGS) catalyzed breakthroughs across various scientific domains. Illumina's sequencing by synthesis method has long been central to NGS, but new sequencing methods like Element Biosciences' AVITI technology are emerging. AVITI is reported to offer improved signal-to-noise ratios and cost reductions. However, its reliance on rolling circle amplification, which can be affected by polymer size, raises questions about its effectiveness in sequencing small RNAs (sRNAs) such as microRNAs (miRNAs), small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), and many others. These sRNAs are crucial regulators of gene expression and involved in various biological processes. Additionally, capturing capped small RNAs (csRNA-seq) is a powerful method for mapping active or "nascent" RNA polymerase II transcription initiation in tissues and clinical samples.ResultsHere, we report a new protocol for seamlessly sequencing short fragments on the AVITI and demonstrate that AVITI and Illumina sequencing technologies equivalently capture human, cattle (Bos taurus), and bison (Bison bison) sRNA or csRNA sequencing libraries, increasing confidence in both sequencing approaches. Additionally, analysis of generated nascent transcription start site (TSS) data for cattle and bison revealed inaccuracies in their current genome annotations, underscoring the potential and necessity to translate small and nascent RNA sequencing methodologies to livestock.ConclusionsOur accelerated and optimized protocol bridges the advantages of AVITI sequencing with critical methods that rely on sequencing short fragments. This advance bolsters the utility of AVITI technology alongside traditional Illumina platforms, offering new opportunities for NGS applications.
BackgroundThe piRNA pathway in animal gonads functions as an 'RNA-based immune system', serving to silence transposable elements and prevent inheritance of novel invaders. In Drosophila, this pathway relies on three gonad-specific Argonaute proteins (Argonaute-3, Aubergine and Piwi) that associate with 23-28 nucleotide piRNAs, directing the silencing of transposon-derived transcripts. Transposons constitute a primary driver of genome evolution, yet the evolution of piRNA pathway factors has not received in-depth exploration. Specifically, channel nuclear pore proteins, which impact piRNA processing, exhibit regions of rapid evolution in their promoters. Consequently, the question arises whether such a mode of evolution is a general feature of transposon silencing pathways.ResultsBy employing genomic analysis of coding and promoter regions within genes that function in transposon silencing in Drosophila, we demonstrate that the promoters of germ cell-specific piRNA factors are undergoing rapid evolution. Our findings indicate that rapid promoter evolution is a common trait among piRNA factors engaged in germline silencing across insect species, potentially contributing to gene expression divergence in closely related taxa. Furthermore, we observe that the promoters of genes exclusively expressed in germ cells generally exhibit rapid evolution, with some divergence in gene expression.ConclusionOur results suggest that increased germline promoter evolution, in partnership with other factors, could contribute to transposon silencing and evolution of species through differential expression of genes driven by invading transposons.
Background The common house spider Parasteatoda tepidariorum represents an emerging new model organism of arthropod evolutionary and developmental (EvoDevo) studies. Recent technical advances have resulted in the first single-cell sequencing (SCS) data on this species allowing deeper insights to be gained into its early development, but mid-to-late stage embryos were not included in these pioneering studies. Results Therefore, we performed SCS on mid-to-late stage embryos of Parasteatoda and characterized resulting cell clusters by means of in-silico analysis (comparison of key markers of each cluster with previously published information on these genes). In-silico prediction of the nature of each cluster was then tested/verified by means of additional in-situ hybridization experiments with additional markers of each cluster. Conclusions Our data show that SCS data reliably group cells with similar genetic fingerprints into more or less distinct clusters, and thus allows identification of developing cell types on a broader level, such as the distinction of ectodermal, mesodermal and endodermal cell lineages, as well as the identification of distinct developing tissues such as subtypes of nervous tissue cells, the developing heart, or the ventral sulcus (VS). In comparison with recent other SCS studies on the same species, our data represent later developmental stages, and thus provide insights into different stages of developing cell types and tissues such as differentiating neurons and the VS that are only present at these later stages.
Background Local adaptation is a key evolutionary process that enhances the growth of plants in their native habitat compared to non-native habitats, resulting in patterns of adaptive genetic variation across the entire geographic range of the species. The study of population adaptation to local environments and predicting their response to future climate change is important because of climate change.Results Here, we explored the genetic diversity of candidate genes associated with bud burst in pedunculate oak individuals sampled from 6 populations in Poland. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) diversity was assessed in 720 candidate genes using the sequence capture technique, yielding 18,799 SNPs. Using landscape genomic approaches, we identified 8 FST outliers and 781 unique SNPs in 389 genes associated with geography, climate, and phenotypic variables (individual/family spring and autumn phenology, family diameter at breast height (DBH), height, and survival) that are potentially involved in local adaptation. Then, using a nonlinear multivariate model, Gradient Forests, we identified vulnerable areas of the pedunculate oak distribution in Poland that are at risk from climate change.Conclusions The model revealed that pedunculate oak populations in the eastern part of the analyzed geographical region are the most sensitive to climate change. Our results might offer an initial evaluation of a potential management strategy for preserving the genetic diversity of pedunculate oak.
BackgroundThe expansion of sequencing technologies as a result of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic enabled pathogen (meta)genomics to be deployed as a routine component of surveillance in many countries. Scaling genomic surveillance, however, comes with associated costs in both equipment and sequencing reagents, which should be optimized. Here, we evaluate the cost efficiency and performance of different read lengths in identifying pathogens in metagenomic samples. We carefully evaluated performance metrics, costs, and time requirements relative to choices of 75, 150 and 300 base pairs (bp) read lengths in pathogen identification.ResultsOur findings revealed that moving from 75 bp to 150 bp read length approximately doubles both the cost and sequencing time. Opting for 300 bp reads leads to approximately two- and three-fold increases, respectively, in cost and sequencing time compared to 75 bp reads. For viral pathogen detection, the sensitivity median ranged from 99% with 75 bp reads to 100% with 150-300 bp reads. However, bacterial pathogens detection was less effective with shorter reads: 87% with 75 bp, 95% with 150 bp, and 97% with 300 bp reads. These findings were consistent across different levels of taxa abundance. The precision of pathogen detection using shorter reads was comparable to that of longer reads across most viral and bacterial taxa.ConclusionsDuring disease outbreak situations, when swift responses are required for pathogen identification, we suggest prioritizing 75 bp read lengths, especially if detection of viral pathogens is aimed. This practical approach allows better use of resources, enabling the sequencing of more samples using streamlined workflows, while maintaining a reliable response capability.
Background Klebsiella pneumoniae is the major cause of nosocomial infections worldwide and is related to a worsening increase in Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria (MDR) and virulence genes that seriously affect immunosuppressed patients, long-stay intensive care patients, elderly individuals, and children. Whole-Genome Sequencing (WGS) has resulted in a useful strategy for characterizing the genomic components of clinically important bacteria, such as K. pneumoniae, enabling them to monitor genetic changes and understand transmission, highlighting the risk of dissemination of resistance and virulence associated genes in hospitals. In this study, we report on WGS 14 clinical isolates of K. pneumoniae from a pediatric hospital biobank of Guayaquil, Ecuador. Results The main findings revealed pronounced genetic heterogeneity among the isolates. Multilocus sequencing type ST45 was the predominant lineage among non-KPC isolates, whereas ST629 was found more frequently among KPC isolates. Phylogenetic analysis suggested local transmission dynamics. Comparative genomic analysis revealed a core set of 3511 conserved genes and an open pangenome in neonatal isolates. The diversity of MLSTs and capsular types, and the high genetic diversity among these isolates indicate high intraspecific variability. In terms of virulence factors, we identified genes associated with adherence, biofilm formation, immune evasion, secretion systems, multidrug efflux pump transporters, and a notably high number of genes related to iron uptake. A large number of these genes were detected in the ST45 isolate, whereas iron uptake yersiniabactin genes were found exclusively in the non-KPC isolates. We observed high resistance to commonly used antibiotics and determined that these isolates exhibited multidrug resistance including beta-lactams, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, quinolones, trimetropins, fosfomycin and macrolides; additionally, resistance-associated point mutations and cross-resistance genes were identified in all the isolates. We also report the first K. pneumoniae KPC-3 gene producers in Ecuador. Conclusions Our WGS results for clinical isolates highlight the importance of MDR in neonatal K. pneumoniae infections and their genetic diversity. WGS will be an imperative strategy for the surveillance of K. pneumoniae in Ecuador, and will contribute to identifying effective treatment strategies for K. pneumoniae infections in critical units in patients at stratified risk.
BackgroundWD40 proteins, which are highly prevalent in eukaryotes, play important roles in plant development and stress responses. However, systematic identification and exploration of WD40 proteins in tobacco have not yet been conducted. ResultsIn this study, a total of 399 WD40 regulatory genes were identified in common tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum). Gene structure and motif analysis revealed structural and functional diversity among different clades of tobacco WD40 regulatory genes. The expansion of tobacco WD40 regulatory genes was mainly driven by segmental duplication and purifying selection. A potential regulatory network of NtWD40s suggested that NtWD40s might be regulated by miRNAs and transcription factors in various biological processes. Expression pattern analysis via transcriptome analysis and qRT-PCR revealed that many NtWD40s exhibited tissue-specific expression patterns and might be involved in various biotic and abiotic stresses. Furthermore, we have validated the critical role of NtTTG1, which was located in the nuclei of trichome cells, in enhancing the drought tolerance of tobacco plants. ConclusionsOur study provides comprehensive information to better understand the evolution of WD40 regulatory genes and their roles in different stress responses in tobacco.
Morchella spongiola is a highly prized mushroom for its delicious flavor and medical value and is one of the most flourishing, representative, and dominant macrofungi in the Qilian Mountains of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau subkingdoms (QTPs). However, the understanding of M. spongiola remains largely unknown, and its taxonomy is ambiguous. In this study, we redescribed a unique species of M. spongiola, i.e., micromorphology, molecular data, genomics, and comparative genomics, and the historical biogeography of M. spongiola were estimated for 182 single-copy homologous genes. A high-quality chromosome-level reference genome of M. spongiola M12-10 was obtained by combining PacBio HiFi data and Illumina sequencing technologies; it was approximately 57.1 Mb (contig N50 of 18.14 Mb) and contained 9775 protein-coding genes. Comparative genome analysis revealed considerable conservation and unique characteristics between M. spongiola M12-10 and 32 other Morchella species. Molecular phylogenetic analysis indicated that M. spongiola M12-10 is similar to the M. prava/Mes-7 present in sandy soil near rivers, differentiating from black morels similar to 43.06 Mya (million years ago), and diverged from M. parva/Mes-7 at approximately 12.85 Mya (in the Miocene epoch), which is closely related to the geological activities in the QTPs (in the Neogene). Therefore, M. spongiola is a unique species rather than a synonym of M. vulgaris/Mes-5, which has a distinctive grey-brown sponge-like ascomata. This genome of M. spongiola M12-10 is the first published genome sequence of the species in the genus Morchella from the QTPs, which could aid future studies on functional gene identification, germplasm resource management, and molecular breeding efforts, as well as evolutionary studies on the Morchella taxon in the QTPs.
BackgroundIn the context of pathogen surveillance, it is crucial to ensure interoperability and harmonized data. Several surveillance systems are designed to compare bacteria and identify outbreak clusters based on core genome MultiLocus Sequence Typing (cgMLST). Among the different approaches available to generate bacterial cgMLST, our research used an assembly-based approach (chewBBACA tool).MethodsSimulations of short-read sequencing were conducted for 5 genomes of 27 pathogens of interest in animal, plant, and human health to evaluate the repeatability and reproducibility of cgMLST. Various quality parameters, such as read quality and depth of sequencing were applied, and several read simulations and genome assemblies were repeated using three tools: SPAdes, Unicycler and Shovill. In vitro sequencing were also used to evaluate assembly impact on cgMLST results, for six bacterial species: Bacillus thuringiensis, Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella enterica, Staphylococcus aureus, Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Xylella fastidiosa.ResultsThe results highlighted variability in cgMLST, which not only related to the assembly tools, but also induced by the intrinsic composition of the genomes themselves. This variability observed in simulated sequencing was further validated with real data for six of the bacterial pathogens studied.ConclusionThis highlights that the intrinsic genome composition affects assembly and resulting cgMLST profiles, and that variability in bioinformatics tools can induce a bias in cgMLST profiles. In conclusion, we propose that the completeness of cgMLST schemes should be considered when clustering strains.
Transposable elements (TEs) are a major force in the evolution of plant genomes. Differences in the transposition activities and landscapes of TEs can vary substantially, even in closely related species. Interspecific hybridization, a widely employed technique in tomato breeding, results in the creation of novel combinations of TEs from distinct species. The implications of this process for TE transposition activity have not been studied in modern cultivars. In this study, we used nanopore sequencing of extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA) and identified two highly active Ty1/Copia LTR retrotransposon families of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), called Salsa and Ketchup. Elements of these families produce thousands of eccDNAs under controlled conditions and epigenetic stress. EccDNA sequence analysis revealed that the major parts of eccDNA produced by Ketchup and Salsa exhibited low similarity to the S. lycopersicum genomic sequence. To trace the origin of these TEs, whole-genome nanopore sequencing and de novo genome assembly were performed. We found that these TEs occurred in a tomato breeding line via interspecific introgression from S. peruvianum. Our findings collectively show that interspecific introgressions can contribute to both genetic and phenotypic diversity not only by introducing novel genetic variants, but also by importing active transposable elements from other species.
Great Bay Estuary (GBE), within the rapidly warming Gulf of Maine, has experienced significant ecological shifts this century due to naturalization of invasive species. The range expansion of the American blue crab (Callinectes sapidus) currently underway from the mid-Atlantic northward brings the possibility of similar ecological shifts. This study accounts recent trapping and diet analysis of C. sapidus in GBE. Diet is an important component of understanding how the blue crab range expansion may affect GBE ecosystem functions. Across all sites and trap types, 27 blue crabs were captured. Metagenomic analysis of shotgun sequencing techniques were used on the gut contents of blue crabs captured. Most specimens had > 50% Eukaryote sequences. Overall results of this gut content study confirm a mixed diet indicative of an opportunistic feeder. Using metagenomics to analyze the diet of blue crabs as they establish viable populations in GBE will be a useful tool for predicting how these range expanding organisms are interacting within this important estuarine ecosystem, which will promote sustainable development by informing end users who may be affected by these crabs to help them meet their needs in the present and future. This project falls within Global Goal SDG14: Life Below Water.
BackgroundPolyamine oxidase (PAO) is a crucial enzyme involved in the breakdown of polyamines (PAs) in plants. It not only regulates the levels of PAs, but also plays a role in the oxidative decomposition of PAs and the release of stress-related signals, contributing to the plant's response and resistance to various adversities. While there have been numerous studies on the response of PAO to stress in other crops, there is a lack of research on this topic in potatoes, a major food crop.ResultsIn this study, we aimed to explore the biological function of the StPAO gene in potato growth and development, as well as its expression patterns under stress. Using bioinformatics methods, we identified 14 StPAO genes in the potato genome. Protein sequence comparisons revealed a high similarity between the PAO proteins of potato and Arabidopsis. Chromosomal mapping and gene structure analysis showed that the StPAO genes were not evenly distributed on the chromosome and all contained an amino-oxidase domain. Furthermore, analysis of the promoters of these genes revealed the presence of abiotic and stress-related cis-acting elements, indicating their potential role in responding to different stresses. To investigate the expression patterns of these genes under stress, we used qRT-PCR to study their response to high temperature, drought, and ABA stress. Our results showed that StPAO6 and StPAO10 were significantly up-regulated under high temperature stress, indicating that they were involved in the process of potato resistance to high temperatures. Similarly, StPAO1, StPAO3, and StPAO4 were significantly up-regulated under drought stress, indicating their potential role in potatoes' responses to drought. After ABA treatment, the expression levels of StPAO4, StPAO5, StPAO7, and StPAO14 were significantly up-regulated, suggesting their involvement in chemical defense mechanisms. Interestingly, the expression of StPAO11-13 was inhibited by all three stresses.ConclusionsIn conclusion, our study highlights the multifunctional nature of the StPAO gene family in potatoes, which plays a crucial role in coping with various stresses. This research deepens our understanding of the potato StPAO gene family and provides a reference for future studies on its function. It also serves as a theoretical basis for breeding stress-resistant potato varieties in the future.
The oomycete Phytophthora cinnamomi is a devastating plant pathogen with a notably broad host range. It is the causal agent of Phytophthora root rot (PRR), arguably the most economically important yield-limiting disease in Persea americana (avocado). Despite this, our understanding of the mechanisms P. cinnamomi employs to infect and successfully colonize avocado remains limited, particularly regarding the pathogen's ability to maintain its biotrophic and necrotrophic lifestyles during infection. The pathogen utilises a large repertoire of effector proteins which function in facilitating and establishing disease in susceptible host plants. Crinkling and necrosis effectors (CRN/Crinklers) are suspected to manipulate cell death to aid in maintenance of the pathogens biotrophic and necrotrophic lifestyles during different stages of infection. The current study identified 25 P. cinnamomi CRN effectors from the GKB4 genome using an HMM profile and assigned putative function to them as either cell death inducers or suppressors. Function was assigned to 10 PcinCRNs by analysing their RNA-seq expression profiles, relatedness to other functionally characterised Phytophthora CRNs and tertiary protein predictions. The full-length coding sequences for these PcinCRNs were confirmed by Sanger sequencing, six of which were found to have two divergent alleles. The presence of alleles indicates that the proteins encoded may perform contradicting functions in cell death manipulation, or function in different host plant species. Overall, this study provides a foundation for future research on P. cinnamomi infection and cell death manipulation mechanisms.
Bacillus tropicus is a recently identified subspecies of the Bacillus cereus group of bacteria that have been shown to possess genes associated with antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and identified as the causative agent for anthrax-like disease in Chinese soft-shelled turtles. In addition, B. tropicus has demonstrated great potential in the fields of bioremediation and bioconversion. This article describes the comparative genomics of a Bacillus phage vB_Btc-RBClinn15 (referred to as RBClin15) infecting the recently identified B. tropicus AOA-CPS1. RBClin15 is a temperate phage with a putative parABS partitioning system as well as an arbitrium system, which are presumed to enable extrachromosomal genome maintenance and regulate the lysis/lysogeny switch, respectively. The temperate phage RBClin15 has been sequenced however, was erroneously deposited as a plasmid in the NCBI GenBank database. A BLASTn search against the GenBank database using the whole genome sequence of RBClin15 revealed seven other putative temperate phages that were also deposited as plasmids in the database. Comparative genomic analyses shows that RBClin15 shares between 87 and 92% average nucleotide identity (ANI) with the seven temperate phages from the GenBank database. All together RBClin15 and the seven putative temperate phages share common genome arrangements and < 29% protein homologs with the closest phages, including 0105phi7-2. A phylogenomic tree and proteome-based phylogenetic tree analysis showed that RBClin15 and the seven temperate phages formed a separate branch from the closest phage, 0105phi7-2. In addition, the intergenomic similarity between RBClin15 and its closely related phages ranged between 0.3 and 47.7%. Collectively, based on the phylogenetic, and comparative genomic analyses, we propose three new species which will include RBClin15 and the seven temperate phages in the newly proposed genus Theosmithvirus under Caudoviricetes.
BackgroundThe majority of CAKUT-associated CNVs overlap at least one miRNA gene, thus affecting the cellular levels of the corresponding miRNA. We aimed to investigate the potency of restitution of CNV-affected miRNA levels to remediate the dysregulated expression of target genes involved in kidney physiology and development in vitro.MethodsHeterozygous MIR484 knockout HEK293 and homozygous MIR185 knockout HEK293 cell lines were used as models depicting the deletion of the frequently affected miRNA genes by CAKUT-associated CNVs. After treatment with the corresponding miRNA mimics, the levels of the target genes have been compared to the non-targeting control treatment. For both investigated miRNAs, MDM2 and PKD1 were evaluated as common targets, while additional 3 genes were investigated as targets of each individual miRNA (NOTCH3, FIS1 and APAF1 as hsa-miR-484 targets and RHOA, ATF6 and CDC42 as hsa-miR-185-5p targets).ResultsRestitution of the corresponding miRNA levels in both knockout cell lines has induced a change in the mRNA levels of certain candidate target genes, thus confirming the potential to alleviate the CNV effect on miRNA expression. Intriguingly, HEK293 WT treatment with investigated miRNA mimics has triggered a more pronounced effect, thus suggesting the importance of miRNA interplay in different genomic contexts.ConclusionsDysregulation of multiple mRNA targets mediated by CNV-affected miRNAs could represent the underlying mechanism behind the unresolved CAKUT occurrence and phenotypic variability observed in CAKUT patients. Characterizing miRNAs located in CNVs and their potential to become molecular targets could eventually help in understanding and improving the management of CAKUT.
Background Transgenic (Tg) mice are widely used in biomedical research, and they are typically generated by injecting transgenic DNA cassettes into pronuclei of one-cell stage zygotes. Such animals often show unreliable expression of the transgenic DNA, one of the major reasons for which is random insertion of the transgenes. We previously developed a method called "pronuclear injection-based targeted transgenesis" (PITT), in which DNA constructs are directed to insert at pre-designated genomic loci. PITT was achieved by pre-installing so called landing pad sequences (such as heterotypic LoxP sites or attP sites) to create seed mice and then injecting Cre recombinase or PhiC31 integrase mRNAs along with a compatible donor plasmid into zygotes derived from the seed mice. PITT and its subsequent version, improved PITT (i-PITT), overcome disadvantages of conventional Tg mice such as lack of consistent and reliable expression of the cassettes among different Tg mouse lines, and the PITT approach is superior in terms of cost and labor. One of the limitations of PITT, particularly using Cre-mRNA, is that the approach cannot be used for insertion of conditional expression cassettes using Cre-LoxP site-specific recombination. This is because the LoxP sites in the donor plasmids intended for achieving conditional expression of the transgene will interfere with the PITT recombination reaction with LoxP sites in the landing pad. Results To enable the i-PITT method to insert a conditional expression cassette, we modified the approach by simultaneously using PhiC31o and FLPo mRNAs. We demonstrate the strategy by creating a model containing a conditional expression cassette at the Rosa26 locus with an efficiency of 13.7%. We also demonstrate that inclusion of FLPo mRNA excludes the insertion of vector backbones in the founder mice. Conclusions Simultaneous use of PhiC31 and FLP in i-PITT approach allows insertion of donor plasmids containing Cre-loxP-based conditional expression cassettes.
BackgroundVenom systems are ideal models to study genetic regulatory mechanisms that underpin evolutionary novelty. Snake venom glands are thought to share a common origin, but there are major distinctions between venom toxins from the medically significant snake families Elapidae and Viperidae, and toxin gene regulatory investigations in elapid snakes have been limited. Here, we used high-throughput RNA-sequencing to profile gene expression and microRNAs between active (milked) and resting (unmilked) venom glands in an elapid (Eastern Brown Snake, Pseudonaja textilis), in addition to comparative genomics, to identify cis- and trans-acting regulation of venom production in an elapid in comparison to viperids (Crotalus viridis and C. tigris).ResultsAlthough there is conservation in high-level mechanistic pathways regulating venom production (unfolded protein response, Notch signaling and cholesterol homeostasis), there are differences in the regulation of histone methylation enzymes, transcription factors, and microRNAs in venom glands from these two snake families. Histone methyltransferases and transcription factor (TF) specificity protein 1 (Sp1) were highly upregulated in the milked elapid venom gland in comparison to the viperids, whereas nuclear factor I (NFI) TFs were upregulated after viperid venom milking. Sp1 and NFI cis-regulatory elements were common to toxin gene promoter regions, but many unique elements were also present between elapid and viperid toxins. The presence of Sp1 binding sites across multiple elapid toxin gene promoter regions that have been experimentally determined to regulate expression, in addition to upregulation of Sp1 after venom milking, suggests this transcription factor is involved in elapid toxin expression. microRNA profiles were distinctive between milked and unmilked venom glands for both snake families, and microRNAs were predicted to target a diversity of toxin transcripts in the elapid P. textilis venom gland, but only snake venom metalloproteinase transcripts in the viperid C. viridis venom gland. These results suggest differences in toxin gene posttranscriptional regulation between the elapid P. textilis and viperid C. viridis.ConclusionsOur comparative transcriptomic and genomic analyses between toxin genes and isoforms in elapid and viperid snakes suggests independent toxin regulation between these two snake families, demonstrating multiple different regulatory mechanisms underpin a venomous phenotype.
Background Phospholipases constitute a diverse category of enzymes responsible for the breakdown of phospholipids. Their involvement in signal transduction with a pivotal role in plant development and stress responses is well documented.Results In the present investigation, a thorough genome-wide analysis revealed that the pearl millet genome contains at least 44 phospholipase genes distributed across its 7 chromosomes, with chromosome one harbouring the highest number of these genes. The synteny analysis suggested a close genetic relationship of pearl millet phospholipases with that of foxtail millet and sorghum. All identified genes were examined to unravel their gene structures, protein attributes, cis-regulatory elements, and expression patterns in two pearl millet genotypes contrasting for rancidity. All the phospholipases have a high alpha-helix content and distorted regions within the predicted secondary structures. Moreover, many of these enzymes possess binding sites for both metal and non-metal ligands. Additionally, the putative promoter regions associated with these genes exhibit multiple copies of cis-elements specifically responsive to biotic and abiotic stress factors and signaling molecules. The transcriptional profiling of 44 phospholipase genes in two genotypes contrasting for rancidity across six key tissues during pearl millet growth revealed a predominant expression in grains, followed by seed coat and endosperm. Specifically, the genes PgPLD-alpha1-1, PgPLD-alpha1-5, PgPLD-delta1-7a, PgPLA1-II-1a, and PgPLD-delta1-2a exhibited notable expression in grains of both the genotypes while showing negligible expression in the other five tissues. The sequence alignment of putative promoters revealed several variations including SNPs and InDels. These variations resulted in modifications to the corresponding cis-acting elements, forming distinct transcription factor binding sites suggesting the transcriptional-level regulation for these five genes in pearl millet.Conclusions The current study utilized a genome-wide computational analysis to characterize the phospholipase gene family in pearl millet. A comprehensive expression profile of 44 phospholipases led to the identification of five grain-specific candidates. This underscores a potential role for at least these five genes in grain quality traits including the regulation of rancidity in pearl millet. Therefore, this study marks the first exploration highlighting the possible impact of phospholipases towards enhancing agronomic traits in pearl millet.
Background Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) are epigenetic marks that can be induced by environmental stress and elicit heritable patterns of gene expression. To investigate this process in an ecological context, we characterized the influence of salinity stress on histone PTMs within the gills, kidney, and testes of Mozambique tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus). A total of 221 histone PTMs were quantified in each tissue sample and compared between freshwater-adapted fish exposed to salinity treatments that varied in intensity and duration. Results Four salinity-responsive histone PTMs were identified in this study. When freshwater-adapted fish were exposed to seawater for two hours, the relative abundance of H1K16ub significantly increased in the gills. Long-term salinity stress elicited changes in both the gills and testes. When freshwater-adapted fish were exposed to a pulse of severe salinity stress, where salinity gradually increased from freshwater to a maximum of 82.5 g/kg, the relative abundance of H1S1ac significantly decreased in the gills. Under the same conditions, the relative abundance of both H3K14ac and H3K18ub decreased significantly in the testes of Mozambique tilapia. Conclusions This study demonstrates that salinity stress can alter histone PTMs in the gills and gonads of Mozambique tilapia, which, respectively, signify a potential for histone PTMs to be involved in salinity acclimation and adaptation in euryhaline fishes. These results thereby add to a growing body of evidence that epigenetic mechanisms may be involved in such processes.
Background The genus Geobacillus and its associated taxa have been the focal point of numerous thermophilic biotechnological investigations, both at the whole cell and enzyme level. By contrast, comparatively little research has been done on its recently delineated sister genus, Parageobacillus. Here we performed pan-genomic analyses on a subset of publicly available Parageobacillus and Saccharococcus genomes to elucidate their biotechnological potential. Results Phylogenomic analysis delineated the compared taxa into two distinct genera, Parageobacillus and Saccharococcus, with P. caldoxylosilyticus isolates clustering with S. thermophilus in the latter genus. Both genera present open pan-genomes, with the species P. toebii being characterized with the highest novel gene accrual. Diversification of the two genera is driven through the variable presence of plasmids, bacteriophages and transposable elements. Both genera present a range of potentially biotechnologically relevant features, including a source of novel antimicrobials, thermostable enzymes including DNA-active enzymes, carbohydrate active enzymes, proteases, lipases and carboxylesterases. Furthermore, they present a number of metabolic pathways pertinent to degradation of complex hydrocarbons and xenobiotics and for green energy production. Conclusions Comparative genomic analyses of Parageobacillus and Saccharococcus suggest that taxa in both of these genera can serve as a rich source of biotechnologically and industrially relevant secondary metabolites, thermostable enzymes and metabolic pathways that warrant further investigation.
Background Reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) with intercalating dyes is one of the main techniques to assess gene expression levels used in basic and applied research as well as in diagnostics. However, primer design for RT-qPCR can be complex due to the high demands on primer quality. Primers are best placed on exon junctions, should avoid polymorphic regions, be specific to the target transcripts and also prevent genomic amplification accurately, among others. Current software tools manage to meet all the necessary criteria only insufficiently. Here, we present ExonSurfer, a novel, user-friendly web-tool for qPCR primer design.Results ExonSurfer combines the different steps of the primer design process, encompassing target selection, specificity and self-complementarity assessment, and the avoidance of issues arising from polymorphisms. Amplification of potentially contaminating genomic DNA is avoided by designing primers on exon-exon junctions, moreover, a genomic alignment is performed to filter the primers accordingly and inform the user of any predicted interaction. In order to test the whole performance of the application, we designed primer pairs for 26 targets and checked both primer efficiency, amplicon melting temperature and length and confirmed the targeted amplicon by Sanger sequencing. Most of the tested primers accurately and selectively amplified the corresponding targets.Conclusion ExonSurfer offers a comprehensive end-to-end primer design, guaranteeing transcript-specific amplification. The user interface is intuitive, providing essential specificity and amplicon details. The tool can also be used by command line and the source code is available. Overall, we expect ExonSurfer to facilitate RT-qPCR set-up for researchers in many fields.
Background Bacteria of the genus Xanthomonas cause economically significant diseases in various crops. Their virulence is dependent on the translocation of type III effectors (T3Es) into plant cells by the type III secretion system (T3SS), a process regulated by the master response regulator HrpG. Although HrpG has been studied for over two decades, its regulon across diverse Xanthomonas species, particularly beyond type III secretion, remains understudied. Results In this study, we conducted transcriptome sequencing to explore the HrpG regulons of 17 Xanthomonas strains, encompassing six species and nine pathovars, each exhibiting distinct host and tissue specificities. We employed constitutive expression of plasmid-borne hrpG*, which encodes a constitutively active form of HrpG, to induce the regulon. Our findings reveal substantial inter- and intra-specific diversity in the HrpG* regulons across the strains. Besides 21 genes directly involved in the biosynthesis of the T3SS, the core HrpG* regulon is limited to only five additional genes encoding the transcriptional activator HrpX, the two T3E proteins XopR and XopL, a major facility superfamily (MFS) transporter, and the phosphatase PhoC. Interestingly, genes involved in chemotaxis and genes encoding enzymes with carbohydrate-active and proteolytic activities are variably regulated by HrpG*. Conclusions The diversity in the HrpG* regulon suggests that HrpG-dependent virulence in Xanthomonas might be achieved through several distinct strain-specific strategies, potentially reflecting adaptation to diverse ecological niches. These findings enhance our understanding of the complex role of HrpG in regulating various virulence and adaptive pathways, extending beyond T3Es and the T3SS.
In the realm of multi-environment prediction, when the goal is to predict a complete environment using the others as a training set, the efficiency of genomic selection (GS) falls short of expectations. Genotype by environment interaction poses a challenge in achieving high prediction accuracies. Consequently, current efforts are focused on enhancing efficiency by integrating various types of inputs, such as phenomics data, environmental information, and other omics data. In this study, we sought to evaluate the impact of incorporating environmental information into the modeling process, in addition to genomic and phenomics information. Our evaluation encompassed five data sets of soft white winter wheat, and the results revealed a significant improvement in prediction accuracy, as measured by the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE), through the integration of environmental information. Notably, there was an average gain in prediction accuracy of 49.19% in terms of NRMSE across the data sets. Moreover, the observed prediction accuracy ranged from 5.68% (data set 3) to 60.36% (data set 4), underscoring the substantial effect of integrating environmental information. By including genomic, phenomic, and environmental data in prediction models, plant breeding programs can improve selection efficiency across locations.
The advent of droplet-based single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) has dramatically increased data throughput, enabling the release of a diverse array of tissue cell atlases to the public. However, we will show that prominent initiatives such as the Human Cell Atlas [1], the Tabula Sapiens [2] and the Tabula Muris [3] contain a significant amount of contamination products (frequently affecting the whole organ) in their data portals due to suboptimal quality filtering. Our work addresses a critical gap by advocating for more stringent quality filtering, highlighting the imperative for a shift from existing standards, which currently lean towards greater permissiveness. We will show the importance of incorporating cell intronic fraction in quality control -or MALAT1 expression otherwise- showcasing its informative nature and potential to elevate cell atlas data reliability. In summary, here, we unveil the hidden intronic landscape of every tissue and highlight the importance of more rigorous single-cell RNA-sequencing quality assessment in cell atlases to enhance their applicability in diverse downstream analyses.
Background To unravel the evolutionary history of a complex group, a comprehensive reconstruction of its phylogenetic relationships is crucial. This requires meticulous taxon sampling and careful consideration of multiple characters to ensure a complete and accurate reconstruction. The phylogenetic position of the Orestias genus has been estimated partly on unavailable or incomplete information. As a consequence, it was assigned to the family Cyprindontidae, relating this Andean fish to other geographically distant genera distributed in the Mediterranean, Middle East and North and Central America. In this study, using complete genome sequencing, we aim to clarify the phylogenetic position of Orestias within the Cyprinodontiformes order.
BackgroundAbiotic stresses in plants include all the environmental conditions that significantly reduce yields, like drought and heat. One of the most significant effects they exert at the cellular level is the accumulation of reactive oxygen species, which cause extensive damage. Plants possess two mechanisms to counter these molecules, i.e. detoxifying enzymes and non-enzymatic antioxidants, which include many classes of specialized metabolites. Sunflower, the fourth global oilseed, is considered moderately drought resistant. Abiotic stress tolerance in this crop has been studied using many approaches, but the control of specialized metabolites in this context remains poorly understood. Here, we performed the first genome-wide association study using abiotic stress-related specialized metabolites as molecular phenotypes in sunflower. After analyzing leaf specialized metabolites of 450 hybrids using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, we selected a subset of these compounds based on their association with previously known abiotic stress-related quantitative trait loci. Eventually, we characterized these molecules and their associated genes.ResultsWe putatively annotated 30 compounds which co-localized with abiotic stress-related quantitative trait loci and which were associated to seven most likely candidate genes. A large proportion of these compounds were potential antioxidants, which was in agreement with the role of specialized metabolites in abiotic stresses. The seven associated most likely candidate genes, instead, mainly belonged to cytochromes P450 and glycosyltransferases, two large superfamilies which catalyze greatly diverse reactions and create a wide variety of chemical modifications. This was consistent with the high plasticity of specialized metabolism in plants.ConclusionsThis is the first characterization of the genetic control of abiotic stress-related specialized metabolites in sunflower. By providing hints concerning the importance of antioxidant molecules in this biological context, and by highlighting some of the potential molecular mechanisms underlying their biosynthesis, it could pave the way for novel applications in breeding. Although further analyses will be required to better understand this topic, studying how antioxidants contribute to the tolerance to abiotic stresses in sunflower appears as a promising area of research.
Background Quality traits are essential determinants of consumer preferences. Dioscorea alata (Greater Yam), is a starchy tuber crop in tropical regions. However, a comprehensive understanding of the genetic basis underlying yam tuber quality remains elusive. To address this knowledge gap, we employed population genomics and candidate gene association approaches to unravel the genetic factors influencing the quality attributes of boiled yam. Methods and Results Comparative genomics analysis of 45 plant species revealed numerous novel genes absent in the existing D. alata gene annotation. This approach, adding 48% more genes, significantly enhanced the functional annotation of three crucial metabolic pathways associated with boiled yam quality traits: pentose and glucuronate interconversions, starch and sucrose metabolism, and flavonoid biosynthesis. In addition, the whole-genome sequencing of 127 genotypes identified 27 genes under selection and 22 genes linked to texture, starch content, and color through a candidate gene association analysis. Notably, five genes involved in starch content and cell wall composition, including 1,3-beta Glucan synthase, beta-amylase, and Pectin methyl esterase, were common to both approaches and their expression levels were assessed by transcriptomic data. Conclusions The analysis of the whole-genome of 127 genotypes of D. alata and the study of three specific pathways allowed the identification of important genes for tuber quality. Our findings provide insights into the genetic basis of yam quality traits and will help the enhancement of yam tuber quality through breeding programs.
Background Nelore cattle play a key role in tropical production systems due to their resilience to harsh conditions, such as heat stress and seasonally poor nutrition. Monitoring their genetic diversity is essential to manage the negative impacts of inbreeding. Traditionally, inbreeding and inbreeding depression are assessed by pedigree-based coefficients (F), but recently, genetic markers have been preferred for their precision in capturing the inbreeding level and identifying animals at risk of reduced productive and reproductive performance. Hence, we compared the inbreeding and inbreeding depression for productive and reproductive performance traits in Nelore cattle using different inbreeding coefficient estimation methods from pedigree information (F-Ped), the genomic relationship matrix (F-GRM), runs of homozygosity (FROH) of different lengths (> 1 Mb (genome), between 1 and 2 Mb - FROH 1-2; 2-4 Mb FROH 2-4 or > 8 Mb FROH >8) and excess homozygosity (FSNP). Results The correlation between F(Ped )and F-ROH was lower when the latter was based on shorter segments (r = 0.15 with F-ROH 1-2, r = 0.20 with F(ROH )2-4 and r = 0.28 with F(ROH )4-8). Meanwhile, the FPed had a moderate correlation with F-SNP (r = 0.47) and high correlation with FROH >8 (r = 0.58) and FROH-genome (r = 0.60). The FROH-genome was highly correlated with inbreeding based on F-ROH>8 (r = 0.93) and F-SNP (r = 0.88). The FGRM exhibited a high correlation with FROH-genome (r = 0.55) and FROH >8 (r = 0.51) and a lower correlation with other inbreeding estimators varying from 0.30 for F(ROH )2-4 to 0.37 for F-ROH 1-2. Increased levels of inbreeding had a negative impact on the productive and reproductive performance of Nelore cattle. The unfavorable inbreeding effect on productive and reproductive traits ranged from 0.12 to 0.51 for FPed, 0.19-0.59 for FGRM, 0.21-0.58 for FROH-genome, and 0.19-0.54 for FSNP per 1% of inbreeding scaled on the percentage of the mean. When scaling the linear regression coefficients on the standard deviation, the unfavorable inbreeding effect varied from 0.43 to 1.56% for F-Ped, 0.49-1.97% for F-GRM, 0.34-2.2% for FROH-genome, and 0.50-1.62% for FSNP per 1% of inbreeding. The impact of the homozygous segments on reproductive and performance traits varied based on the chromosomes. This shows that specific homozygous chromosome segments can be signs of positive selection due to their beneficial effects on the traits. Conclusions The low correlation observed between F(Ped )and genomic-based inbreeding estimates suggests that the presence of animals with one unknown parent (sire or dam) in the pedigree does not account for ancient inbreeding. The ROH hotspots surround genes related to reproduction, growth, meat quality, and adaptation to environmental stress. Inbreeding depression has adverse effects on productive and reproductive traits in Nelore cattle, particularly on age at puberty in young bulls and heifer calving at 30 months, as well as on scrotal circumference and body weight when scaled on the standard deviation of the trait.
BackgroundThe locus for naked neck (Na) in chickens reduces feather coverage and leads to increased heat dissipation from the body surface resulting in better adaptability to hot conditions. However, the Na gene is linked to significantly lower hatchability due to an increased late embryonic mortality. It has been argued that the causative gene GDF7 may have a direct pleiotropic effect on hatchability via its effect on muscle development. Thus, the study presented here analyses the transcriptome of the hatching muscle (M. complexus) and shows how GDF7 impacts development leading to reduced hatching rates in Na chickens.ResultsUsing 12 chicken embryos (6 x wildtype (Wt) and 6 x Na) RNA was extracted from the M. complexus of each embryo and sequenced. The resulting differential expression analyses led to the discovery of 461 differentially expressed (DE) genes in the M. complexus of the experimental group. Among those, 77 genes were of uncertain function (LOC symbols), with 31 were classified as uncharacterised. The regulation of a number of pathways involved in normal embryonic development, were found to be negatively influenced by the Na genotype. Further pathways involved in cell-cell adhesion, cell signalling pathways, and amino acid (AA) metabolism/transport were also observed. GDF7 (alias BMP12), whose localised overexpression in the neck skin causes the Na/Na phenotype, was significantly overexpressed in the M. complexus of Na/Na embryos, and shows a significant increase in the number of binding sites for the transcription factor PITX2 was also observed.ConclusionIn Na chickens, GDF7 is under the control of a mutated cis-regulatory element, whose actions are known to suppress the development and distribution of feathers through the sensitizing action of retinoic acid. In this study, a number of DE genes with over 10 retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) in close proximity were observed, indicating changes to the retinol metabolism. With the understanding that the Na/Na mutation leads to increased retinoic acid activity, this indicates a high likelihood of GDF7 excerpting a direct pleiotropic effect, not just in the observed reduction in feather patterning, but also impacting the development of the M.complexus, and consequently leading to the reduced hatchability observed in birds with the Na/Na genotype.Furthermore, the enrichment of PITX2 binding sites in proximity to DE genes in the M. complexus, also indicates that muscle development is still ongoing in Na embryos. This suggests that the M. complexus is not yet fully developed, further increasing the potential for late embryonic mortality in Na chicks at hatching.ConclusionIn Na chickens, GDF7 is under the control of a mutated cis-regulatory element, whose actions are known to suppress the development and distribution of feathers through the sensitizing action of retinoic acid. In this study, a number of DE genes with over 10 retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) in close proximity were observed, indicating changes to the retinol metabolism. With the understanding that the Na/Na mutation leads to increased retinoic acid activity, this indicates a high likelihood of GDF7 excerpting a direct pleiotropic effect, not just in the observed reduction in feather patterning, but also impacting the development of the M.complexus, and consequently leading to the reduced hatchability observed in birds with the Na/Na genotype.Furthermore, the enrichment of PITX2 binding sites in proximity to DE genes in the M.
Background The association between Apolipoprotein A5 (APOA5) genetic polymorphisms and susceptibility to metabolic syndrome (MetS) has been established by many studies, but there have been conflicting results from the literature. We performed a meta-analysis of observational studies to evaluate the association between APOA5 gene polymorphisms and the prevalence of MetS. Methods PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, and Scopus were searched up to April 2024. The random effects model was used to estimate the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the association between APOA5 gene polymorphisms and the prevalence of MetS development. The potential sources of heterogeneity were evaluated by subgroup analyses and sensitivity analyses. Results A total of 30 studies with 54,986 subjects (25,341 MetS cases and 29,645 healthy controls) were included. The presence of rs662799 and rs651821 polymorphisms is associated with an approximately 1.5-fold higher likelihood of MetS prevalence (OR = 1.42, 95% CI: 1.32, 1.53, p < 0.001; I2 = 67.1%; P-heterogeneity < 0.001; and OR = 1.50, 95% CI: 1.36-1.65, p < 0.001), respectively. MetS is also more prevalent in individuals with the genetic variants rs3135506 and rs2075291. There was no evidence of a connection with rs126317. Conclusion The present findings suggest that polymorphisms located in the promoter and coding regions of the APOA5 gene are associated with an increased prevalence of MetS in the adult population. Identifying individuals with these genetic variations could lead to early disease detection and the implementation of preventive strategies to reduce the risk of MetS and its related health issues. However, because the sample size was small and there was evidence of significant heterogeneity for some APOA5 gene polymorphisms, these results need to be confirmed by more large-scale and well-designed studies.
Background Common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is a worldwide cereal crop, which is an integral part of the diets of many countries. In addition, the MYB gene of wheat plays a role in the response to salt stress. Results "Y1805" is a Tritipyrum variety that is relatively tolerant to salt. We used transcriptome analysis to show that the "Y1805" MYB gene was both highly expressed and sensitive to salt stress. Compared with control roots, the level of MYB expression during salt stress was higher, which rapidly decreased to control levels during the recovery process. MYB gene relative expression showed the highest levels in "Y1805" roots during salt stress, with the stems and then leaves being the next highest stressed tissues. The novel MYB gene (TtMYB1) was successfully cloned from "Y1805". It showed a coding sequence length of 783 bp with 95.79% homology with Tel2E01G633100 from Thinopyrum elongatum. TtMYB1 and MYB from Th. elongatum were clustered in the same branch using phylogenetic analysis, which indicated high similarities. The TtMYB1 gene is located in the nucleus. The coleoptile method was employed when a TtMYB1 overexpression vector was used during transformation into "1718" (common wheat). Under high salt stress, TtMYB1 leaves of overexpression lines had decreased wilting, when compared with wild-type (WT) plants. During normal conditions, salt stress, and recovery, the lengths of the roots and the heights of seedlings from the overexpression lines were found to be significantly greater than roots and seedlings of WT plants. In addition, during high salt stress, the overexpression lines showed that proline and soluble sugar levels were higher than that of WT plants, but with lower malondialdehyde levels. Forty-three proteins that interacted with TtMYB1 were identified using the yeast two-hybrid assay. Protein-protein interaction analyses indicated that most were SANT domain-containing and Wd repeat region domain-containing proteins. Among these proteins, ribosomal proteins were the main node. Abiotic stress-related terms (such as "carbonate dehydratase activity", "protein targeting peroxisomes", and "glutathione peroxidase activity") were enriched in GO analysis. In KEGG analysis, "carbohydrate metabolism", "environmental information processing", "genetic information processing", "signaling and cell precursors", and "energy metabolism" pathways were enriched. Conclusion The TtMYB1 gene might enhance salt tolerance by increasing proline and soluble sugar content and antioxidase activity in transgenic wheat. It therefore has the potential to enhance high salt tolerance in plants.
Background Liriodendron chinense is susceptible to extinction due to the increasing severity of abiotic stresses resulting from global climate change, consequently impacting its growth, development, and geographic distribution. However, the L. chinense remains pivotal in both socio-economic and ecological realms. The LRR-RLK (leucine-rich repeat receptor-like protein kinase) genes, constituting a substantial cluster of receptor-like kinases in plants, are crucial for plant growth and stress regulation and are unexplored in the L. chinense. Result 233 LchiLRR-RLK genes were discovered, unevenly distributed across 17 chromosomes and 24 contigs. Among these, 67 pairs of paralogous genes demonstrated gene linkages, facilitating the expansion of the LchiLRR-RLK gene family through tandem (35.82%) and segmental (64.18%) duplications. The synonymous and nonsynonymous ratios showed that the LchiLRR-RLK genes underwent a purifying or stabilizing selection during evolution. Investigations in the conserved domain and protein structures revealed that the LchiLRR-RLKs are highly conserved, carrying conserved protein kinase and leucine-rich repeat-like domians that promote clustering in different groups implicating gene evolutionary conservation. A deeper analysis of LchiLRR-RLK full protein sequences phylogeny showed 13 groups with a common ancestor protein. Interspecies gene collinearity showed more orthologous gene pairs between L. chinense and P. trichocarpa, suggesting various similar biological functions between the two plant species. Analysis of the functional roles of the LchiLRR-RLK genes using the qPCR demonstrated that they are involved in cold, heat, and salt stress regulation, especially, members of subgroups VIII, III, and Xa. Conclusion Conclusively, the LRR-RLK genes are conserved in L. chinense and function to regulate the temperature and salt stresses, and this research provides new insights into understanding LchiLRR-RLK genes and their regulatory effects in abiotic stresses.
BackgroundCalcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) phosphorylate downstream target proteins in response to signals transmitted by free calcium ions (Ca2+, one of the second messengers) and thus play important regulatory roles in many biological processes, such as plant growth, development, and stress response.ResultsA bioinformatic analysis, as well as thorough evolutionary and expression investigations, were conducted to confirm previous reports of functional evidence for plant CDPKs. Using the Phytozome database's BLAST search engine and the HMM search tool in TBtools software, we discovered that CDPKs are well conserved from green algae to flowering angiosperms in various gene family sizes. Additional investigations of the obtained CDPKs revealed high conservation of domain and motif numbers, gene architectures, and patterns. However, this conservation differed among plant species. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the CDPK gene family diverged from a common ancient gene. Similarly, investigations into plant interspecies evolutionary relationships revealed common ancestral plant species, suggesting speciation of plants and evolution based on plant adaptation and diversification. A search for the driving force of CDPK gene family expansion revealed that dispersed duplication events, among other duplication events, contributed largely to CDPK gene family expansion. Gene localization analysis in P. trichocarpa demonstrated that most CDPK genes are localized within several cell organelles and bind other kinases and proteins to perform their biological functions efficiently. Using RNA-seq data and qPCR analyses, we postulated that PtCDPKs play functional roles in abiotic stress responses by regulating cold, heat, drought and salt stress to varying extents.ConclusionThe CDPK genes are well conserved in plants and are critical entities in abiotic stress regulation, and further exploration and manipulation of these genes in the future may provide solutions to some of the challenges in agriculture, forestry and food security.
IntroductionOur understanding of particular gut microbiota members such as Bifidobacterium and Enterococcus in low-middle-income countries remains very limited, particularly early life strain-level beneficial traits. This study addresses this gap by exploring a collection of bacterial strains isolated from the gut of Zimbabwean infants; comparing their genomic characteristics with strains isolated from infants across North America, Europe, and other regions of Africa.Materials and methodFrom 110 infant stool samples collected in Harare, Zimbabwe, 20 randomly selected samples were used to isolate dominant early-life gut microbiota members Bifidobacterium and Enterococcus. Isolated strains were subjected to whole genome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis including functional annotation of carbohydrates, human milk oligosaccharide (HMO) and protein degradation genes and clusters, and the presence of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs).ResultsThe study observed some location-based clustering within the main five identified taxonomic groups. Furthermore, there were varying and overall species-specific numbers of genes belonging to different GH families encoded within the analysed dataset. Additionally, distinct strain- and species-specific variances were identified in the potential of Bifidobacterium for metabolizing HMOs. Analysis of putative protease activity indicated a consistent presence of gamma-glutamyl hydrolases in Bifidobacterium, while Enterococcus genomes exhibited a high abundance of aspartyl peptidases. Both genera harboured resistance genes against multiple classes of antimicrobial drugs, with Enterococcus genomes containing a higher number of ARGs compared to Bifidobacterium, on average.ConclusionThis study identified promising probiotic strains within Zimbabwean isolates, offering the potential for early-life diet and microbial therapies. However, the presence of antibiotic resistance genes in infant-associated microbes raises concerns for infection risk and next-stage probiotic development. Further investigation in larger cohorts, particularly in regions with limited existing data on antibiotic and probiotic use, is crucial to validate these initial insights.Impact statementThis research represents the first investigation of its kind in the Zimbabwean context, focusing on potential probiotic strains within the early-life gut microbiota. By identifying local probiotic strains, this research can contribute to the development of probiotic interventions that are tailored to the Zimbabwean population, which can help address local health challenges and promote better health outcomes for infants. Another essential aspect of the study is the investigation of antimicrobial resistance genes present in Zimbabwean bacterial strains. Antimicrobial resistance is a significant global health concern, and understanding the prevalence and distribution of resistance genes in different regions can help inform public health policies and interventions.
Background Polymorphisms of Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt), Plasmodium falciparum multi-drug resistance 1 (pfmdr1) and Plasmodium falciparum kelch 13-propeller (pfk13) genes are accepted as valid molecular markers of quinoline antimalarials and artemisinins. This study investigated the distribution patterns of these genes in P. falciparum isolates from the areas along the Thai-Myanmar border during the two different periods of antimalarial usage in Thailand. Results Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) were used to detect pfcrt mutations at codons 76, 220, 271, 326, 356, and 371 as well as pfmdr1 mutation at codon 86. The prevalence of pfcrt mutations was markedly high (96.4-99.7%) in samples collected during both periods. The proportions of mutant genotypes (number of mutant/total isolate) at codons 76, 220, 271, 326, 356 and 371 in the isolates collected during 1993-1998 (period 1) compared with 2002-2008 (period 2) were 97.9% (137/140) vs. 97.1% (401/413), 97.9% (140/143) vs. 98.8% (171/173), 97.2% (139/143) vs. 97.1% (333/343), 98.6% (140/142) vs. 99.7% (385/386), 96.4% (134/139) vs. 98.2% (378/385) and 97.8% (136/139) vs. 98.9% (375/379), respectively. Most isolates carried pfmdr1 wild-type at codon 86, with a significant difference in proportions genotypes (number of wild type/total sample) in samples collected during period 1 [92.9% (130/140)] compared with period 2 [96.9% (379/391)]. Investigation of pfmdr1 copy number was performed by real-time PCR. The proportions of isolates carried 1, 2, 3 and 4 or more than 4 copies of pfmdr1 (number of isolates carried correspondent copy number/total isolate) were significantly different between the two sample collecting periods (65.7% (90/137) vs. 87.8% (390/444), 18.2% (25/137) vs. 6.3%(28/444), 5.1% (7/137) vs. 1.4% (6/444) and 11.0% (15/137) vs. 4.5% (20/444), for period 1 vs. period 2, respectively). No pfk13 mutation was detected by nested PCR and nucleotide sequencing in all samples with successful analysis (n = 68). Conclusions The persistence of pfcrt mutations and pfmdr1 wild-types at codon 86, along with gene amplification in P. falciparum, contributes to the continued resistance of chloroquine and mefloquine in P. falciparum isolates in the study area. Regular surveillance of antimalarial drug resistance in P. falciparum, incorporating relevant molecular markers and treatment efficacy assessments, should be conducted.
BackgroundThe application of biotechnologies which make use of genetic markers in chicken breeding is developing rapidly. Diversity Array Technology (DArT) is one of the current Genotyping-By-Sequencing techniques allowing the discovery of whole genome sequencing. In livestock, DArT has been applied in cattle, sheep, and horses. Currently, there is no study on the application of DArT markers in chickens. The aim was to study the effectiveness of DArTSeq markers in the genetic diversity and population structure of indigenous chickens (IC) and SASSO in the Eastern Province of Rwanda.MethodsIn total 87 blood samples were randomly collected from 37 males and 40 females of indigenous chickens and 10 females of SASSO chickens purposively selected from 5 sites located in two districts of the Eastern Province of Rwanda. Genotyping by Sequencing (GBS) using DArTseq technology was employed. This involved the complexity reduction method through digestion of genomic DNA and ligation of barcoded adapters followed by PCR amplification of adapter-ligated fragments.ResultsFrom 45,677 DArTseq SNPs and 25,444 SilicoDArTs generated, only 8,715 and 6,817 respectively remained for further analysis after quality control. The average call rates observed, 0.99 and 0.98 for DArTseq SNPs and SilicoDArTs respectively were quite similar. The polymorphic information content (PIC) from SilicoDArTs (0.33) was higher than that from DArTseq SNPs (0.22). DArTseq SNPs and SilicoDArTs had 34.4% and 34% of the loci respectively mapped on chromosome 1. DArTseq SNPs revealed distance averages of 0.17 and 0.15 within IC and SASSO chickens respectively while the respective averages observed with SilicoDArTs were 0.42 and 0.36. The average genetic distance between IC and SASSO chickens was moderate for SilicoDArTs (0.120) compared to that of DArTseq SNPs (0.048). The PCoA and population structure clustered the chicken samples into two subpopulations (1 and 2); 1 is composed of IC and 2 by SASSO chickens. An admixture was observed in subpopulation 2 with 12 chickens from subpopulation 1.ConclusionsThe application of DArTseq markers have been proven to be effective and efficient for genetic relationship between IC and separated IC from exotic breed used which indicate their suitability in genomic studies. However, further studies using all chicken genetic resources available and large big sample sizes are required.
BackgroundA heterozygous-enriched region (HER) is a genomic region with high variability generated by factors such as balancing selection, introgression, and admixture processes. In this study, we evaluated the genomic background of HERs and the impact of different parameters (i.e., minimum number of SNPs in a HER, maximum distance between two consecutive SNPs, minimum length of a HER, maximum number of homozygous allowed in a HER) and scenarios [i.e., different SNP panel densities and whole-genome sequence (WGS)] on the detection of HERs. We also compared HERs characterized in Holstein cattle with those identified in Angus, Jersey, and Norwegian Red cattle using WGS data.ResultsThe parameters used for the identification of HERs significantly impact their detection. The maximum distance between two consecutive SNPs did not impact HERs detection as the same average of HERs (269.31 +/- 787.00) was observed across scenarios. However, the minimum number of markers, maximum homozygous markers allowed inside a HER, and the minimum length size impacted HERs detection. For the minimum length size, the 10 Kb scenario showed the highest average number of HERs (1,364.69 +/- 1,483.64). The number of HERs decreased as the minimum number of markers increased (621.31 +/- 1,271.83 to 6.08 +/- 21.94), and an opposite pattern was observed for the maximum homozygous markers allowed inside a HER (54.47 +/- 195.51 to 494.89 +/- 1,169.35). Forty-five HER islands located in 23 chromosomes with high Tajima's D values and differential among the observed and estimated heterozygosity were detected in all evaluated scenarios, indicating their ability to potentially detect regions under balancing selection. In total, 3,440 markers and 28 genes previously related to fertility (e.g., TP63, ZSCAN23, NEK5, ARHGAP44), immunity (e.g., TP63, IGC, ARHGAP44), residual feed intake (e.g., MAYO9A), stress sensitivity (e.g., SERPINA6), and milk fat percentage (e.g., NOL4) were identified. When comparing HER islands among breeds, there were substantial overlaps between Holstein with Angus (95.3%), Jersey (94.3%), and Norwegian Red cattle (97.1%), indicating conserved HER across taurine breeds.ConclusionsThe detection of HERs varied according to the parameters used, but some HERs were consistently identified across all scenarios. Heterozygous genotypes observed across generations and breeds appear to be conserved in HERs. The results presented could serve as a guide for defining HERs detection parameters and further investigating their biological roles in future studies.
Background Junipers (Juniperus spp.) are woody native, invasive plants that have caused encroachment problems in the U.S. western rangelands, decreasing forage productivity and biodiversity. A potential solution to this issue is using goats in targeted grazing programs. However, junipers, which grow in dry and harsh environmental conditions, use chemical defense mechanisms to deter herbivores. Therefore, genetically selecting goats for increased juniper consumption is of great interest for regenerative rangeland management. In this context, the primary objectives of this study were to: 1) estimate variance components and genetic parameters for predicted juniper consumption in divergently selected Angora (ANG) and composite Boer x Spanish (BS) goat populations grazing on Western U.S. rangelands; and 2) to identify genomic regions, candidate genes, and biological pathways associated with juniper consumption in these goat populations. Results The average juniper consumption was 22.4% (+/- 18.7%) and 7.01% (+/- 12.1%) in the BS and ANG populations, respectively. The heritability estimates (realized heritability within parenthesis) for juniper consumption were 0.43 +/- 0.02 (0.34 +/- 0.06) and 0.19 +/- 0.03 (0.13 +/- 0.03) in BS and ANG, respectively, indicating that juniper consumption can be increased through genetic selection. The repeatability values of predicted juniper consumption were 0.45 for BS and 0.28 for ANG. A total of 571 significant SNP located within or close to 231 genes in BS, and 116 SNP related to 183 genes in ANG were identified based on the genome-wide association analyses. These genes are primarily associated with biological pathways and gene ontology terms related to olfactory receptors, intestinal absorption, and immunity response. Conclusions These findings suggest that juniper consumption is a heritable trait of polygenic inheritance influenced by multiple genes of small effects. The genetic parameters calculated indicate that juniper consumption can be genetically improved in both goat populations.
Bacteria of the genera Xylanibacter and Segatella are among the most dominant groups in the rumen microbiota. They are characterized by the ability to utilize different hemicelluloses and pectin of plant cell-wall as well as plant energy storage polysaccharides. The degradation is possible with the use of cell envelope bound multiprotein apparatuses coded in polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs), which have been shown to be substrate specific. The knowledge of PUL presence in rumen Xylanibacter and Segatella based on bioinformatic analyses is already established and transcriptomic and genetic approaches confirmed predicted PULs for a limited number of substrates. In this study, we transcriptomically identified additional different PULs in Xylanibacter ruminicola KHP1 and Segatella bryantii TF1-3. We also identified substrate preferences and found that specific growth rate and extent of growth impacted the choice of substrates preferentially used for degradation. These preferred substrates were used by both strains simultaneously as judged by their PUL upregulation. Lastly, beta-glucan and xyloglucan were used by these strains in the absence of bioinformatically and transcriptomically identifiable PUL systems.
BackgroundThe mRNA subcellular localization bears substantial impact in the regulation of gene expression, cellular migration, and adaptation. However, the methods employed for experimental determination of this localization are arduous, time-intensive, and come with a high cost.MethodsIn this research article, we tackle the essential challenge of predicting the subcellular location of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) through Unified mRNA Subcellular Localization Predictor (UMSLP), a machine learning (ML) based approach. We embrace an in silico strategy that incorporate four distinct feature sets: kmer, pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition, nucleotide physicochemical attributes, and the 3D sequence depiction achieved via Z-curve transformation for predicting subcellular localization in benchmark dataset across five distinct subcellular locales, encompassing nucleus, cytoplasm, extracellular region (ExR), mitochondria, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER).ResultsThe proposed ML model UMSLP attains cutting-edge outcomes in predicting mRNA subcellular localization. On independent testing dataset, UMSLP ahcieved over 87% precision, 94% specificity, and 94% accuracy. Compared to other existing tools, UMSLP outperformed mRNALocator, mRNALoc, and SubLocEP by 11%, 21%, and 32%, respectively on average prediction accuracy for all five locales. SHapley Additive exPlanations analysis highlights the dominance of k-mer features in predicting cytoplasm, nucleus, ER, and ExR localizations, while Z-curve based features play pivotal roles in mitochondria subcellular localization detection.AvailabilityWe have shared datasets, code, Docker API for users in GitHub at: https://github.com/smusleh/UMSLP.
BackgroundCystic Fibrosis (CF) is a monogenic disease caused by mutations in the gene coding the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator (CFTR) protein, but its overall physio-pathology cannot be solely explained by the loss of the CFTR chloride channel function. Indeed, CFTR belongs to a yet not fully deciphered network of proteins participating in various signalling pathways.MethodsWe propose a systems biology approach to study how the absence of the CFTR protein at the membrane leads to perturbation of these pathways, resulting in a panel of deleterious CF cellular phenotypes.ResultsBased on publicly available transcriptomic datasets, we built and analyzed a CF network that recapitulates signalling dysregulations. The CF network topology and its resulting phenotypes were found to be consistent with CF pathology.ConclusionAnalysis of the network topology highlighted a few proteins that may initiate the propagation of dysregulations, those that trigger CF cellular phenotypes, and suggested several candidate therapeutic targets. Although our research is focused on CF, the global approach proposed in the present paper could also be followed to study other rare monogenic diseases.
BackgroundDNA methylation is a covalent bond modification that is observed mainly at cytosine bases in the context of CG pairs. DNA methylation patterns reflect the status of individual tissues, such as cell composition, age, and the local environment, in mammals. Genetic factors also impact DNA methylation, and the genetic diversity among various dog breeds provides a valuable platform for exploring this topic. Compared to those in the human genome, studies on the profiling of methylation in the dog genome have been less comprehensive.ResultsOur study provides extensive profiling of DNA methylation in the whole blood of three dog breeds using whole-genome bisulfite sequencing. The difference in DNA methylation between breeds was moderate after removing CpGs overlapping with potential genetic variation. However, variance in methylation between individuals was common and often occurred in promoters and CpG islands (CGIs). Moreover, we adopted contextual awareness methodology to characterize DNA primary sequences using natural language processing (NLP). This method could be used to effectively separate unmethylated CGIs from highly methylated CGIs in the sequences that are identified by the conventional criteria.ConclusionsThis study presents a comprehensive DNA methylation landscape in the dog blood. Our observations reveal the similar methylation patterns across dog breeds, while CGI regions showed high variations in DNA methylation level between individuals. Our study also highlights the potential of NLP approach for analyzing low-complexity DNA sequences, such as CGIs.
BackgroundThe 4 serotypes of dengue virus (DENV1-4) can each cause potentially deadly dengue disease, and are spreading globally from tropical and subtropical areas to more temperate ones. Nepal provides a microcosm of this global phenomenon, having met each of these grim benchmarks. To better understand DENV transmission dynamics and spread into new areas, we chose to study dengue in Nepal and, in so doing, to build the onsite infrastructure needed to manage future, larger studies.Methods and resultsDuring the 2022 dengue season, we enrolled 384 patients presenting at a hospital in Kathmandu with dengue-like symptoms; 79% of the study participants had active or recent DENV infection (NS1 antigen and IgM). To identify circulating serotypes, we screened serum from 50 of the NS1+ participants by RT-PCR and identified DENV1, 2, and 3 - with DENV1 and 3 codominant. We also performed whole-genome sequencing of DENV, for the first time in Nepal, using our new on-site capacity. Sequencing analysis demonstrated the DENV1 and 3 genomes clustered with sequences reported from India in 2019, and the DENV2 genome clustered with a sequence reported from China in 2018.ConclusionThese findings highlight DENV's geographic expansion from neighboring countries, identify China and India as the likely origin of the 2022 DENV cases in Nepal, and demonstrate the feasibility of building onsite capacity for more rapid genomic surveillance of circulating DENV. These ongoing efforts promise to protect populations in Nepal and beyond by informing the development and deployment of DENV drugs and vaccines in real time.
Whole genome sequencing (WGS) has become a gold standard for diagnosing genomic variation. Peripheral blood is a common sample source for the extraction of nucleic acids for Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) applications. Here, we present an integrated and fully automated device design that uses new concepts of fluid mechanics, heat-mass transfer, and thermodynamics of enzymatic reactions to extract nucleic acids from the blood and perform DNA library preparation from a pre-filled plate. We demonstrate that the presented device effectively extracts dsDNA with an average of 25.03 mu g/mL and 25.91 mu g/mL yield from citrate-stabilized human peripheral blood stored in Fresh (4 degrees C) and Frozen (-20 degrees C) conditions, respectively. Furthermore, our method automatically extracts nucleic acids and creates a high-quality sequence-ready DNA library from blood stabilized with citrate and EDTA for 8 samples simultaneously in a single run with a total operation time of similar to 7 h. Our results show the required coverage and depth of the genome, highlighting an essential application of this device in processing blood samples for genome sequencing.
BackgroundMuscle growth post-birth relies on muscle fiber number and size. Myofibre number, metabolic and contractile capacities are established pre-birth during prenatal myogenesis. The aim of this study was to identify genes involved in skeletal muscle development in cattle, sheep, and pigs - livestock.ResultsThe cattle analysis showed significant differences in 5043 genes during the 135-280 dpc period. In sheep, 444 genes differed significantly during the 70-120 dpc period. Pigs had 905 significantly different genes for the 63-91 dpc period.The biological processes and KEGG pathway enrichment results in each species individually indicated that DEGs in cattle were significantly enriched in regulation of cell proliferation, cell division, focal adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, and signaling pathways (PI3K-Akt, PPAR, MAPK, AMPK, Ras, Rap1); in sheep - positive regulation of fibroblast proliferation, negative regulation of endothelial cell proliferation, focal adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, insulin resistance, and signaling pathways (PI3K-Akt, HIF-1, prolactin, Rap1, PPAR); in pigs - regulation of striated muscle tissue development, collagen fibril organization, positive regulation of insulin secretion, focal adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, and signaling pathways (PPAR, FoxO, HIF-1, AMPK). Among the DEGs common for studied animal species, 45 common genes were identified. Based on these, a protein-protein interaction network was created and three significant modules critical for skeletal muscle myogenesis were found, with the most significant module A containing four recognized hub genes - EGFR, VEGFA, CDH1, and CAV1. Using the miRWALK and TF2DNA databases, miRNAs (bta-miR-2374 and bta-miR-744) and transcription factors (CEBPB, KLF15, RELA, ZNF143, ZBTB48, and REST) associated with hub genes were detected. Analysis of GO term and KEGG pathways showed that such processes are related to myogenesis and associated with module A: positive regulation of MAP kinase activity, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, insulin-like growth factor binding, focal adhesion, and signaling pathways (PI3K-Akt, HIF-1, Rap1, Ras, MAPK).ConclusionsThe identified genes, common to the prenatal developmental period of skeletal muscle in livestock, are critical for later muscle development, including its growth by hypertrophy. They regulate valuable economic characteristics. Enhancing and breeding animals according to the recognized genes seems essential for breeders to achieve superior gains in high-quality muscle mass.
Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are recognized as pivotal players in the regulation of essential physiological processes such as nutrient homeostasis, development, and stress responses in plants. Common methods for predicting ncRNAs are susceptible to significant effects of experimental conditions and computational methods, resulting in the need for significant investment of time and resources. Therefore, we constructed an ncRNA predictor(MFPINC), to predict potential ncRNA in plants which is based on the PINC tool proposed by our previous studies. Specifically, sequence features were carefully refined using variance thresholding and F-test methods, while deep features were extracted and feature fusion were performed by applying the GRU model. The comprehensive evaluation of multiple standard datasets shows that MFPINC not only achieves more comprehensive and accurate identification of gene sequences, but also significantly improves the expressive and generalization performance of the model, and MFPINC significantly outperforms the existing competing methods in ncRNA identification. In addition, it is worth mentioning that our tool can also be found on Github (https://github.com/Zhenj-Nie/MFPINC) the data and source code can also be downloaded for free.
Background According to Chinese ancient books, both fruits and rhizomes of Polygonatum cyrtonema Hua have medicinal and edible values. Up to now, there is no report about the metabolite profiles and regulatory network in fruits and different year-old rhizomes of P. cyrtonema. Results In this study, we performed integrative analyses of metabolome and transcriptome to reveal the dynamic accumulation and regulatory network of fruits and different year-old rhizomes in P. cyrtonema. The relative content of phenolic acids, lignans and coumarins, flavonoids and alkaloids increased with growth years, while steroids and lipids decreased with it. In addition, the relative content of nucleotides and derivatives, flavonoids, organic acids, steroids and lipids in fruits were higher than rhizomes. Genes that might relate to the biosynthesis of polysaccharides, flavonoids, triterpene saponins and alkaloids biosynthesis were further analyzed by transcriptome analysis, including sacA, GMPP, PMM, CCoAOMT, CHI, ANR, CHS, DXS, GGPS, ZEP, CYP72A219 and so on, for their expressions were positively correlated with the relative content of the metabolites. Additionally, the correlation network in sugar and aromatic amino acids metabolites were constructed to further illustrate the biosynthesis of polysaccharides, flavonoids and alkaloids in P. cyrtonema, and some transcription factors (TFs) were screened, such as C2C2, MYB, bZIP, GRAS and NAC. Conclusions This study can deepen our understanding of the accumulation patterns and molecular mechanism of the main compounds in P. cyrtonema, and provide reference for the standardize production of P. cyrtonema.
BackgroundPhoto-thermo-sensitive male sterility (PTMS), which refers to the male sterility triggered by variations in photoperiod and temperature, is a crucial element in the wheat two-line hybrid system. The development of safe production and efficient propagation for male sterile lines holds utmost importance in two-line hybrid wheat. Under the stable photoperiod condition, PTMS is mainly induced by high or low temperatures in wheat, but the effect of daily temperature difference (DTD) on the fertility conversion of PTMS lines has not been reported. Here, three BS type PTMS lines including BS108, BS138, and BS366, as well as a control wheat variety J411 were used to analyze the correlation between fertility and DTD using differentially sowing tests, photo-thermo-control experiments, and transcriptome sequencing.ResultsThe differentially sowing tests suggested that the optimal sowing time for safe seed production of the three PTMS lines was from October 5th to 25th in Dengzhou, China. Under the condition of 12 h 12 degrees C, the PTMS lines were greatly affected by DTD and exhibited complete male sterility at a temperature difference of 15 degrees C. Furthermore, under different temperature difference conditions, a total of 20,677 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were obtained using RNA sequencing. Moreover, through weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and KEGG enrichment analysis, the identified DEGs had a close association with "starch and sucrose metabolism", "phenylpropanoid biosynthesis", "MAPK signaling pathway-plant", "flavonoid biosynthesis", and "cutin, and suberine and wax biosynthesis". qRT-PCR analysis showed the expression levels of core genes related to KEGG pathways significantly decreased at a temperature difference of 15 degrees C. Finally, we constructed a transcriptome mediated network of temperature difference affecting male sterility.ConclusionsThe findings provide important theoretical insights into the correlation between temperature difference and male sterility, providing guidance for the identification and selection of more secure and effective PTMS lines.
Background Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers play significant roles in accelerating breeding and basic crop research. Several soybean SNP panels have been developed. However, there is still a lack of SNP panels for differentiating between wild and cultivated populations, as well as for detecting polymorphisms within both wild and cultivated populations.Results This study utilized publicly available resequencing data from over 3,000 soybean accessions to identify differentiating and highly conserved SNP and insertion/deletion (InDel) markers between wild and cultivated soybean populations. Additionally, a naturally occurring mutant gene library was constructed by analyzing large-effect SNPs and InDels in the population.Conclusion The markers obtained in this study are associated with numerous genes governing agronomic traits, thus facilitating the evaluation of soybean germplasms and the efficient differentiation between wild and cultivated soybeans. The natural mutant gene library permits the quick identification of individuals with natural mutations in functional genes, providing convenience for accelerating soybean breeding using reverse genetics.
Background In response to seasonal cold and food shortage, the Xizang plateau frogs, Nanorana parkeri (Anura: Dicroglossidae), enter a reversible hypometabolic state where heart rate and oxygen consumption in skeletal muscle are strongly suppressed. However, the effect of winter hibernation on gene expression and metabolic profiling in these two tissues remains unknown. In the present study, we conducted transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses of heart and skeletal muscle from summer- and winter-collected N. parkeri to explore mechanisms involved in seasonal hibernation. Results We identified 2407 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in heart and 2938 DEGs in skeletal muscle. Enrichment analysis showed that shared DEGs in both tissues were enriched mainly in translation and metabolic processes. Of these, the expression of genes functionally categorized as "response to stress", "defense mechanisms", or "muscle contraction" were particularly associated with hibernation. Metabolomic analysis identified 24 and 22 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) in myocardium and skeletal muscle, respectively. In particular, pathway analysis showed that DEMs in myocardium were involved in the pentose phosphate pathway, glycerolipid metabolism, pyruvate metabolism, citrate cycle (TCA cycle), and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. By contrast, DEMs in skeletal muscle were mainly involved in amino acid metabolism. Conclusions In summary, natural adaptations of myocardium and skeletal muscle in hibernating N. parkeri involved transcriptional alterations in translation, stress response, protective mechanisms, and muscle contraction processes as well as metabolic remodeling. This study provides new insights into the transcriptional and metabolic adjustments that aid winter survival of high-altitude frogs N. parkeri.
BackgroundCharcoal rot of soybean is caused by the hemibiotrophic fungus Macrophomina phaseolina, a global crop destroyer and an important pathogen in the midwestern USA. The quantitative nature of host resistance and the complexity of the soybean-M. phaseolina interaction at the molecular level have hampered resistance breeding. A previous study showed that L-ascorbic acid (LAA) pre-treatment before M. phaseolina inoculation reduced charcoal rot lesion length in excised soybean stems. This study aimed to elucidate the genetic underpinnings of M. phaseolina-induced senescence and the mitigating effects of ascorbic acid on this physiological process within the same pathosystem.ResultsRNA was sequenced from M. phaseolina-resistant and -susceptible soybean genotypes following M. phaseolina inoculation, LAA, and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-an oxidative stress inducer-application followed by inoculation. More genes were down-regulated in the resistant and susceptible genotypes than up-regulated when the M. phaseolina-inoculated treatments were compared to mock-inoculated control treatments. Gene ontology (GO) term and KEGG pathways analysis detected M. phaseolina-induced up-regulation of receptor-like kinase genes. In contrast, many genes related to antioxidants, defense, and hormonal pathways were down-regulated in both genotypes. LAA pre-treatment induced genes related to photosynthesis and reactive oxygen species responses in both genotypes. H2O2 pre-treatment following inoculation up-regulated many stress-response genes, while hormone signal transduction and photosynthesis-related genes were down-regulated in both genotypes.ConclusionsResults revealed transcriptional variation and genes associated with M. phaseolina-induced senescence in soybean. Ascorbic acid induced many photosynthetic genes, suggesting a complex regulation of defense and immunity in the plant against the hemibiotroph. Soybean plants also exhibited enhanced stress responsiveness when treated with H2O2 followed by inoculation with M. phaseolina. This study will broaden more research avenues related to transcriptional regulation during the M. phaseolina-soybean interaction and the potential role of receptor-like kinases, oxidative stress-responsive genes, ethylene-mediated signaling and enhanced photosynthetic gene expression when mounting host resistance to this important soybean pathogen.
Databases of genome sequences are growing exponentially, but, in some cases, assembly is incomplete and genes are poorly annotated. For evolutionary studies, it is important to identify all members of a given gene family in a genome. We developed a method for identifying most, if not all, members of a gene family from raw genomes in which assembly is of low quality, using the P-type ATPase superfamily as an example. The method is based on the translation of an entire genome in all six reading frames and the co-occurrence of two family-specific sequence motifs that are in close proximity to each other. To test the method's usability, we first used it to identify P-type ATPase members in the high-quality annotated genome of barley (Hordeum vulgare). Subsequently, after successfully identifying plasma membrane H+-ATPase family members (P3A ATPases) in various plant genomes of varying quality, we tested the hypothesis that the number of P3A ATPases correlates with the ability of the plant to tolerate saline conditions. In 19 genomes of glycophytes and halophytes, the total number of P3A ATPase genes was found to vary from 7 to 22, but no significant difference was found between the two groups. The method successfully identified P-type ATPase family members in raw genomes that are poorly assembled.
Collagenous connective tissue, found throughout the bodies of metazoans, plays a crucial role in maintaining structural integrity. This versatile tissue has the potential for numerous biomedical applications, including the development of innovative collagen-based biomaterials. Inspiration for such advancements can be drawn from echinoderms, a group of marine invertebrates that includes sea stars, sea cucumbers, brittle stars, sea urchins, and sea lilies. Through their nervous system, these organisms can reversibly control the pliability of their connective tissue components (i.e., tendons and ligaments) that are composed of mutable collagenous tissue (MCT). The variable tensile properties of the MCT allow echinoderms to perform unique functions, including postural maintenance, reduction of muscular energy use, autotomy to avoid predators, and asexual reproduction through fission. The changes in the tensile strength of MCT structures are specifically controlled by specialized neurosecretory cells called juxtaligamental cells. These cells release substances that either soften or stiffen the MCT. So far, only a few of these substances have been purified and characterized, and the genetic underpinning of MCT biology remains unknown. Therefore, we have conducted this research to identify MCT-related genes in echinoderms as a first step towards a better understanding of the MCT molecular control mechanisms. Our ultimate goal is to unlock new biomaterial applications based on this knowledge. In this project, we used RNA-Seq to identify and annotate differentially expressed genes in the MCT structures of the brittle star Ophiomastix wendtii. As a result, we present a list of 16 putative MCT modulator genes, which will be validated and characterized in forthcoming functional analyses.
BackgroundAntimicrobial resistance (AMR) remains a significant global health threat particularly impacting low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). These regions often grapple with limited healthcare resources and access to advanced diagnostic tools. Consequently, there is a pressing need for innovative approaches that can enhance AMR surveillance and management. Machine learning (ML) though underutilized in these settings, presents a promising avenue. This study leverages ML models trained on whole-genome sequencing data from England, where such data is more readily available, to predict AMR in E. coli, targeting key antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin, ampicillin, and cefotaxime. A crucial part of our work involved the validation of these models using an independent dataset from Africa, specifically from Uganda, Nigeria, and Tanzania, to ascertain their applicability and effectiveness in LMICs. ResultsModel performance varied across antibiotics. The Support Vector Machine excelled in predicting ciprofloxacin resistance (87% accuracy, F1 Score: 0.57), Light Gradient Boosting Machine for cefotaxime (92% accuracy, F1 Score: 0.42), and Gradient Boosting for ampicillin (58% accuracy, F1 Score: 0.66). In validation with data from Africa, Logistic Regression showed high accuracy for ampicillin (94%, F1 Score: 0.97), while Random Forest and Light Gradient Boosting Machine were effective for ciprofloxacin (50% accuracy, F1 Score: 0.56) and cefotaxime (45% accuracy, F1 Score:0.54), respectively. Key mutations associated with AMR were identified for these antibiotics. ConclusionAs the threat of AMR continues to rise, the successful application of these models, particularly on genomic datasets from LMICs, signals a promising avenue for improving AMR prediction to support large AMR surveillance programs. This work thus not only expands our current understanding of the genetic underpinnings of AMR but also provides a robust methodological framework that can guide future research and applications in the fight against AMR.
Background Virome studies on birds, including chickens are relatively scarce, particularly from the African continent. Despite the continuous evolution of RNA viruses and severe losses recorded in poultry from seasonal viral outbreaks, the information on RNA virome composition is even scantier as a result of their highly unstable nature, genetic diversity, and difficulties associated with characterization. Also, information on factors that may modulate the occurrence of some viruses in birds is limited, particularly for domesticated birds. Viral metagenomics through advancements in sequencing technologies, has enabled the characterization of the entire virome of diverse host species using various samples.Methods The complex RNA viral constituents present in 27 faecal samples of asymptomatic chickens from a South African farm collected at 3-time points from two independent seasons were determined, and the impact of the chicken's age and collection season on viral abundance and diversity was further investigated. The study utilized the non-invasive faecal sampling method, mRNA viral targeted enrichment steps, a whole transcriptome amplification strategy, Illumina sequencing, and bioinformatics tools.Results The results obtained revealed a total of 48 viral species spanning across 11 orders, 15 families and 21 genera. Viral RNA families such as Coronaviridae, Picornaviridae, Reoviridae, Astroviridae, Caliciviridae, Picorbirnaviridae and Retroviridae were abundant, among which picornaviruses, demonstrated a 100% prevalence across the three age groups (2, 4 and 7 weeks) and two seasons (summer and winter) of the 27 faecal samples investigated. A further probe into the extent of variation between the different chicken groups investigated indicated that viral diversity and abundance were significantly influenced by age (P = 0.01099) and season (P = 0.00099) between chicken groups, while there was no effect on viral shedding within samples in a group (alpha diversity) for age (P = 0.146) and season (P = 0.242).Conclusion The presence of an exceedingly varied chicken RNA virome, encompassing avian, mammalian, fungal, and dietary-associated viruses, underscores the complexities inherent in comprehending the causation, dynamics, and interspecies transmission of RNA viruses within the investigated chicken population. Hence, chickens, even in the absence of discernible symptoms, can harbour viruses that may exhibit opportunistic, commensal, or pathogenic characteristics.
Indoor residual spraying (IRS) and insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) are the main methods used to control mosquito populations for malaria prevention. The efficacy of these strategies is threatened by the spread of insecticide resistance (IR), limiting the success of malaria control. Studies of the genetic evolution leading to insecticide resistance could enable the identification of molecular markers that can be used for IR surveillance and an improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms associated with IR. This study used a weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) algorithm, a systems biology approach, to identify genes with similar co-expression patterns (modules) and hub genes that are potential molecular markers for insecticide resistance surveillance in Kenya and Benin. A total of 20 and 26 gene co-expression modules were identified via average linkage hierarchical clustering from Anopheles arabiensis and An. gambiae, respectively, and hub genes (highly connected genes) were identified within each module. Three specific genes stood out: serine protease, E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase, and cuticular proteins, which were top hub genes in both species and could serve as potential markers and targets for monitoring IR in these malaria vectors. In addition to the identified markers, we explored molecular mechanisms using enrichment maps that revealed a complex process involving multiple steps, from odorant binding and neuronal signaling to cellular responses, immune modulation, cellular metabolism, and gene regulation. Incorporation of these dynamics into the development of new insecticides and the tracking of insecticide resistance could improve the sustainable and cost-effective deployment of interventions.
Background Cis-regulatory mutations often underlie phenotypic evolution. However, because identifying the locations of promoters and enhancers in non-coding regions is challenging, we have fewer examples of identified causative cis-regulatory mutations that underlie naturally occurring phenotypic variations than of causative amino acid-altering mutations. Because cis-regulatory elements have epigenetic marks of specific histone modifications, we can detect cis-regulatory elements by mapping and analyzing them. Here, we investigated histone modifications and chromatin accessibility with cleavage under targets and tagmentation (CUT&Tag) and assay for transposase-accessible chromatin-sequencing (ATAC-seq). Results Using the threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) as a model, we confirmed that the genes for which nearby regions showed active marks, such as H3K4me1, H3K4me3, and high chromatin accessibility, were highly expressed. In contrast, the expression levels of genes for which nearby regions showed repressive marks, such as H3K27me3, were reduced, suggesting that our chromatin analysis protocols overall worked well. Genomic regions with peaks of histone modifications showed higher nucleotide diversity within and between populations. By comparing gene expression in the gills of the marine and stream ecotypes, we identified several insertions and deletions (indels) with transposable element fragments in the candidate cis-regulatory regions. Conclusions Thus, mapping and analyzing histone modifications can help identify cis-regulatory elements and accelerate the identification of causative mutations in the non-coding regions underlying naturally occurring phenotypic variations.
Background Escherichia coli, a ubiquitous inhabitant of the gut microbiota, has been recognized as an indicator of fecal contamination and a potential reservoir for antibiotic resistance genes. Its prevalence in drinking water sources raises concerns about the potential dissemination of antibiotic resistance within aquatic ecosystems and the subsequent impact on public health. The ability of E. coli to acquire and transfer resistance genes, coupled with the constant exposure to low levels of antibiotics in the environment, underscores the need for comprehensive surveillance and rigorous antimicrobial stewardship strategies to safeguard the quality and safety of drinking water supplies, ultimately mitigating the escalation of antibiotic resistance and its implications for human well-being. Methods WG5D strain, isolated from a drinking water distribution source in North-West Province, South Africa, underwent genomic analysis following isolation on nutrient agar, anaerobic cultivation, and DNA extraction. Paired-end Illumina sequencing with a Nextera XT Library Preparation kit was performed. The assembly, annotation, and subsequent genomic analyses, including phylogenetic analysis using TYGS, pairwise comparisons, and determination of genes related to antimicrobial resistance and virulence, were carried out following standard protocols and tools, ensuring comprehensive insights into the strain's genomic features. Results This study explores the notable characteristics of E. coli strain WG5D. This strain stands out because it possesses multiple antibiotic resistance genes, encompassing tetracycline, cephalosporin, vancomycin, and aminoglycoside resistances. Additionally, virulence-associated genes indicate potential heightened pathogenicity, complemented by the identification of mobile genetic elements that underscore its adaptability. The intriguing possibility of bacteriophage involvement and factors contributing to pathogenicity further enriches our understanding. We identified E. coli WG5D as a potential human pathogen associated with a drinking water source in South Africa. The analysis provided several antibiotic resistance-associated genes/mutations and mobile genetic elements. It further identified WG5D as a potential human pathogen. The occurrence of E. coli WG5D raised the awareness of the potential pathogens and the carrying of antibiotic resistance in drinking water. Conclusions The findings of this study have highlighted the advantages of the genomic approach in identifying the bacterial species and antibiotic resistance genes of E. coli and its potential as a human pathogen.
Background Plant-virus interaction models propose that a virus's ability to infect a host genotype depends on the compatibility between virulence and resistance genes. Recently, we conducted an evolution experiment in which lineages of turnip mosaic virus (TuMV) were passaged in Arabidopsis thaliana genotypes carrying mutations in components of the DNA methylation and the histone demethylation epigenetic pathways. All evolved lineages increased infectivity, virulence and viral load in a host genotype-dependent manner. Results To better understand the underlying reasons for these evolved relationships, we delved into the transcriptomic responses of mutant and WT plant genotypes in mock conditions and infected with either the ancestral or evolved viruses. Such a comparison allowed us to classify every gene into nine basic expression profiles. Regarding the targets of viral adaptation, our analyses allowed the identification of common viral targets as well as host genotype-specific genes and categories of biological processes. As expected, immune response-related genes were found to be altered upon infection. However, we also noticed the pervasive over-representation of other functional groups, suggesting that viral adaptation was not solely driven by the level of expression of plant resistance genes. In addition, a significant association between the presence of transposable elements within or upstream the differentially expressed genes was observed. Finally, integration of transcriptomic data into a virus-host protein-protein interaction network highlighted the most impactful interactions. Conclusions These findings shed extra light on the complex dynamics between plants and viruses, indicating that viral infectivity depends on various factors beyond just the plant's resistance genes.
BackgroundFungi are talented producers of secondary metabolites with applications in the pharmaceutical and agrochemical sectors. Aspergillus wentii CBS 141173 has gathered research interest due to its ability to produce high-value norditerpenoid compounds, including anticancer molecules. In this study, we aimed to expand the genomic information available for A. wentii to facilitate the identification of terpenoid biosynthetic genes that may be involved in the production of bioactive molecules.ResultsLong-read genome sequencing of Aspergillus wentii CBS 141173 was conducted using Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) MinION MK1C. In addition, paired-end stranded RNA-seq data from two time points, 7 days and 30 days, was used for functional annotation of the assembled genome. Overall, we assembled a genome of approximately 31.2 Mb and identified 66 biosynthetic gene clusters from the annotated genome. Metabolic extracts of A. wentii were analysed and the production of the bioactive terpenoid asperolide A was confirmed. We further mined the assembled and annotated genome for BGCs involved in terpenoid pathways using a combination of antiSMASH and local BlastP and identified 16 terpene synthases. Phylogenetic analysis was conducted and allowed us to establish relationships with other characterised terpene synthases. We identified two terpene clusters potentially involved in pimarane-like diterpenoid biosynthesis. Finally, the analysis of the 16 terpene synthases in our 7-day and 30-day transcriptomic data suggested that only four of them were constitutively expressed under laboratory conditions.ConclusionThese results provide a scaffold for the future exploration of terpenoid biosynthetic pathways for bioactive molecules in A. wentii. The terpenoid clusters identified in this study are candidates for heterologous gene expression and/or gene disruption experiments. The description and availability of the long-read genome assembly of A. wentii CBS 141173 further provides the basis for downstream genome analysis and biotechnological exploitation of this species.
Background Effective vector control is key to malaria prevention. However, this is now compromised by increased insecticide resistance due to continued reliance on insecticide-based control interventions. In Kenya, we have observed heterogenous resistance to pyrethroids and organophosphates in Anopheles arabiensis which is one of the most widespread malaria vectors in the country. We investigated the gene expression profiles of insecticide resistant An. arabiensis populations from Migori and Siaya counties in Western Kenya using RNA-Sequencing. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) bottle assays were conducted using deltamethrin (DELTA), alphacypermethrin (ACYP) and pirimiphos-methyl (PMM) to determine the resistance status in both sites. Results Mosquitoes from Migori had average mortalities of 91%, 92% and 58% while those from Siaya had 85%, 86%, and 30% when exposed to DELTA, ACYP and PMM, respectively. RNA-Seq analysis was done on pools of mosquitoes which survived exposure ('resistant'), mosquitoes that were not exposed, and the insecticide-susceptible An. arabiensis Dongola strain. Gene expression profiles of resistant mosquitoes from both Migori and Siaya showed an overexpression mainly of salivary gland proteins belonging to both the short and long form D7 genes, and cuticular proteins (including CPR9, CPR10, CPR15, CPR16). Additionally, the overexpression of detoxification genes including cytochrome P450s (CYP9M1, CYP325H1, CYP4C27, CYP9L1 and CYP307A1), 2 carboxylesterases and a glutathione-S-transferase (GSTE4) were also shared between DELTA, ACYP, and PMM survivors, pointing to potential contribution to cross resistance to both pyrethroid and organophosphate insecticides. Conclusion This study provides novel insights into the molecular basis of insecticide resistance in An. arabiensis in Western Kenya and suggests that salivary gland proteins and cuticular proteins are associated with resistance to multiple classes of insecticides.
Background Almost all extant organisms use the same, so-called canonical, genetic code with departures from it being very rare. Even more exceptional are the instances when a eukaryote with non-canonical code can be easily cultivated and has its whole genome and transcriptome sequenced. This is the case of Blastocrithidia nonstop, a trypanosomatid flagellate that reassigned all three stop codons to encode amino acids. Results We in silico predicted the metabolism of B. nonstop and compared it with that of the well-studied human parasites Trypanosoma brucei and Leishmania major. The mapped mitochondrial, glycosomal and cytosolic metabolism contains all typical features of these diverse and important parasites. We also provided experimental validation for some of the predicted observations, concerning, specifically presence of glycosomes, cellular respiration, and assembly of the respiratory complexes. Conclusions In an unusual comparison of metabolism between a parasitic protist with a massively altered genetic code and its close relatives that rely on a canonical code we showed that the dramatic differences on the level of nucleic acids do not seem to be reflected in the metabolisms. Moreover, although the genome of B. nonstop is extremely AT-rich, we could not find any alterations of its pyrimidine synthesis pathway when compared to other trypanosomatids. Hence, we conclude that the dramatic alteration of the genetic code of B. nonstop has no significant repercussions on the metabolism of this flagellate.
BackgroundBlood transcriptomic analysis is widely used to provide a detailed picture of a physiological state with potential outcomes for applications in diagnostics and monitoring of the immune response to vaccines. However, multi-species transcriptomic analysis is still a challenge from a technological point of view and a standardized workflow is urgently needed to allow interspecies comparisons.ResultsHere, we propose a single and complete total RNA-Seq workflow to generate reliable transcriptomic data from blood samples from humans and from animals typically used in preclinical models. Blood samples from a maximum of six individuals and four different species (rabbit, non-human primate, mouse and human) were extracted and sequenced in triplicates. The workflow was evaluated using different wet-lab and dry-lab criteria, including RNA quality and quantity, the library molarity, the number of raw sequencing reads, the Phred-score quality, the GC content, the performance of ribosomal-RNA and globin depletion, the presence of residual DNA, the strandness, the percentage of coding genes, the number of genes expressed, and the presence of saturation plateau in rarefaction curves. We identified key criteria and their associated thresholds to be achieved for validating the transcriptomic workflow. In this study, we also generated an automated analysis of the transcriptomic data that streamlines the validation of the dataset generated.ConclusionsOur study has developed an end-to-end workflow that should improve the standardization and the inter-species comparison in blood transcriptomics studies. In the context of vaccines and drug development, RNA sequencing data from preclinical models can be directly compared with clinical data and used to identify potential biomarkers of value to monitor safety and efficacy.
Background Environmental monitoring of bacterial pathogens is critical for disease control in coastal marine ecosystems to maintain animal welfare and ecosystem function and to prevent significant economic losses. This requires accurate taxonomic identification of environmental bacterial pathogens, which often cannot be achieved by commonly used genetic markers (e.g., 16S rRNA gene), and an understanding of their pathogenic potential based on the information encoded in their genomes. The decreasing costs of whole genome sequencing (WGS), combined with newly developed bioinformatics tools, now make it possible to unravel the full potential of environmental pathogens, beyond traditional microbiological approaches. However, obtaining a high-quality bacterial genome, requires initial cultivation in an axenic culture, which is a bottleneck in environmental microbiology due to cross-contamination in the laboratory or isolation of non-axenic strains. Results We applied WGS to determine the pathogenic potential of two Vibrio isolates from coastal seawater. During the analysis, we identified cross-contamination of one of the isolates and decided to use this dataset to evaluate the possibility of bioinformatic contaminant removal and recovery of bacterial genomes from a contaminated culture. Despite the contamination, using an appropriate bioinformatics workflow, we were able to obtain high quality and highly identical genomes (Average Nucleotide Identity value 99.98%) of one of the Vibrio isolates from both the axenic and the contaminated culture. Using the assembled genome, we were able to determine that this isolate belongs to a sub-lineage of Vibrio campbellii associated with several diseases in marine organisms. We also found that the genome of the isolate contains a novel Vibrio plasmid associated with bacterial defense mechanisms and horizontal gene transfer, which may offer a competitive advantage to this putative pathogen. Conclusions Our study shows that, using state-of-the-art bioinformatics tools and a sufficient sequencing effort, it is possible to obtain high quality genomes of the bacteria of interest and perform in-depth genomic analyses even in the case of a contaminated culture. With the new isolate and its complete genome, we are providing new insights into the genomic characteristics and functional potential of this sub-lineage of V. campbellii. The approach described here also highlights the possibility of recovering complete bacterial genomes in the case of non-axenic cultures or obligatory co-cultures.
The genomes of species belonging to the genus Colletotrichum harbor a substantial number of cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (CYPs) encoded by a broad diversity of gene families. However, the biological role of their CYP complement (CYPome) has not been elucidated. Here, we investigated the putative evolutionary scenarios that occurred during the evolution of the CYPome belonging to the Colletotrichum Graminicola species complex (s.c.) and their biological implications. The study revealed that most of the CYPome gene families belonging to the Graminicola s.c. experienced gene contractions. The reductive evolution resulted in species restricted CYPs are predominant in each CYPome of members from the Graminicola s.c., whereas only 18 families are absolutely conserved among these species. However, members of CYP families displayed a notably different phylogenetic relationship at the tertiary structure level, suggesting a putative convergent evolution scenario. Most of the CYP enzymes of the Graminicola s.c. share redundant functions in secondary metabolite biosynthesis and xenobiotic metabolism. Hence, this current work suggests that the presence of a broad CYPome in the genus Colletotrichum plays a critical role in the optimization of the colonization capability and virulence.
BackgroundFungal DNA is rarely reported in metagenomic studies of ancient samples. Although fungi are essential for their interactions with all kingdoms of life, limited information is available about ancient fungi. Here, we explore the possibility of the presence of ancient fungal species in the gut of & Ouml;tzi, the Iceman, a naturally mummified human found in the Tyrolean Alps (border between Italy and Austria).MethodsA robust bioinformatic pipeline has been developed to detect and authenticate fungal ancient DNA (aDNA) from muscle, stomach, small intestine, and large intestine samples.ResultsWe revealed the presence of ancient DNA associated with Pseudogymnoascus genus, with P. destructans and P. verrucosus as possible species, which were abundant in the stomach and small intestine and absent in the large intestine and muscle samples.ConclusionWe suggest that & Ouml;tzi may have consumed these fungi accidentally, likely in association with other elements of his diet, and they persisted in his gut after his death due to their adaptability to harsh and cold environments. This suggests the potential co-occurrence of ancient humans with opportunistic fungal species and proposes and validates a conservative bioinformatic approach for detecting and authenticating fungal aDNA in historical metagenomic samples.
Solanum lycopersicum (family: Solanaceae) is a crucial crop and model organism for many phenotypic traits, and its sequenced genome provides valuable insights into plant biology and crop improvement. This study investigated lectin receptor-like kinases (LecRLKs) in tomato, focusing on L-type and G-type families. Mining the tomato genome (ITAG2.4) revealed 161 putative lectin genes across seven families, with GNA-related genes being the most abundant. Gene duplication analysis indicated that tandem and segmental duplications were the primary mechanisms driving LecRLK gene family expansion, particularly for G-type LecRLKs. These duplicated genes showed evidence of both purifying and negative selection, suggesting functional conservation and sub-functionalization. L-type and G-type LecRLKs exhibited diverse domain rearrangement architectures and subcellular localizations, with G-type LecRLKs showing greater expansion and architectural diversity. Differential expression analysis during abiotic stress (drought, heat, and cold stress) revealed key responsive genes. During drought stress, 63.2% of L-type and 18.5% of G-type LecRLK genes were expressed, with L-type Solyc09g005000.1 and G-type Solyc03g078360.1 genes showing significant 2-fold upregulation. Heat stress (42 degrees C) induced the upregulation of L-type Solyc04g071000.1 and G-type Solyc03g078360.1 and Solyc04g008400.1, particularly after 12-24 h of exposure. Promoter analysis revealed numerous stress-related cis-elements. Transcription factor predictions and miRNA targeting sites suggest complex regulatory mechanisms. This comprehensive in silico characterization of tomato LecRLKs, including their expansion patterns and evolutionary pressures, provides insights into their potential roles in abiotic stress responses and lays the groundwork for enhancing crop resilience through targeted breeding or genetic engineering approaches.
Background Drug repurposing plays a significant role in providing effective treatments for certain diseases faster and more cost-effectively. Successful repurposing cases are mostly supported by a classical paradigm that stems from de novo drug development. This paradigm is based on the "one-drug-one-target-one-disease" idea. It consists of designing drugs specifically for a single disease and its drug's gene target. In this article, we investigated the use of biological pathways as potential elements to achieve effective drug repurposing.Methods Considering a total of 4214 successful cases of drug repurposing, we identified cases in which biological pathways serve as the underlying basis for successful repurposing, referred to as DREBIOP. Once the repurposing cases based on pathways were identified, we studied their inherent patterns by considering the different biological elements associated with this dataset, as well as the pathways involved in these cases. Furthermore, we obtained gene-disease association values to demonstrate the diminished significance of the drug's gene target in these repurposing cases. To achieve this, we compared the values obtained for the DREBIOP set with the overall association values found in DISNET, as well as with the drug's target gene (DREGE) based repurposing cases using the Mann-Whitney U Test.Results A collection of drug repurposing cases, known as DREBIOP, was identified as a result. DREBIOP cases exhibit distinct characteristics compared with DREGE cases. Notably, DREBIOP cases are associated with a higher number of biological pathways, with Vitamin D Metabolism and ACE inhibitors being the most prominent pathways. Additionally, it was observed that the association values of GDAs in DREBIOP cases were significantly lower than those in DREGE cases (p-value < 0.05).Conclusions Biological pathways assume a pivotal role in drug repurposing cases. This investigation successfully revealed patterns that distinguish drug repurposing instances associated with biological pathways. These identified patterns can be applied to any known repurposing case, enabling the detection of pathway-based repurposing scenarios or the classical paradigm.
BackgroundPlanting tested forest reproductive material is crucial to ensure the increased resilience of intensively managed productive stands for timber and wood product markets under climate change scenarios. Single-step Genomic Best Linear Unbiased Prediction (ssGBLUP) analysis is a cost-effective option for using genomic tools to enhance the accuracy of predicted breeding values and genetic parameter estimation in forest tree species. Here, we tested the efficiency of ssGBLUP in a tropical multipurpose tree species, Cordia africana, by partial population genotyping. A total of 8070 trees from three breeding seedling orchards (BSOs) were phenotyped for height. We genotyped 6.1% of the phenotyped individuals with 4373 single nucleotide polymorphisms. The results of ssGBLUP were compared with pedigree-based best linear unbiased prediction (ABLUP) and genomic best linear unbiased prediction (GBLUP), based on genetic parameters, theoretical accuracy of breeding values, selection candidate ranking, genetic gain, and predictive accuracy and prediction bias.ResultsGenotyping a subset of the study population provided insights into the level of relatedness in BSOs, allowing better genetic management. Due to the inbreeding detected within the genotyped provenances, we estimated genetic parameters both with and without accounting for inbreeding. The ssGBLUP model showed improved performance in terms of additive genetic variance and theoretical breeding value accuracy. Similarly, ssGBLUP showed improved predictive accuracy and lower bias than the pedigree-based relationship matrix (ABLUP).ConclusionsThis study of C. africana, a species in decline due to deforestation and selective logging, revealed inbreeding depression. The provenance exhibiting the highest level of inbreeding had the poorest overall performance. The use of different relationship matrices and accounting for inbreeding did not substantially affect the ranking of candidate individuals. This is the first study of this approach in a tropical multipurpose tree species, and the analysed BSOs represent the primary effort to breed C. africana.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been demonstrated to be closely related to human diseases. Studying the potential associations between miRNAs and diseases contributes to our understanding of disease pathogenic mechanisms. As traditional biological experiments are costly and time-consuming, computational models can be considered as effective complementary tools. In this study, we propose a novel model of robust orthogonal non-negative matrix tri-factorization (NMTF) with self-paced learning and dual hypergraph regularization, named SPLHRNMTF, to predict miRNA-disease associations. More specifically, SPLHRNMTF first uses a non-linear fusion method to obtain miRNA and disease comprehensive similarity. Subsequently, the improved miRNA-disease association matrix is reformulated based on weighted k-nearest neighbor profiles to correct false-negative associations. In addition, we utilize L-2,L-1 norm to replace Frobenius norm to calculate residual error, alleviating the impact of noise and outliers on prediction performance. Then, we integrate self-paced learning into NMTF to alleviate the model from falling into bad local optimal solutions by gradually including samples from easy to complex. Finally, hypergraph regularization is introduced to capture high-order complex relations from hypergraphs related to miRNAs and diseases. In 5-fold cross-validation five times experiments, SPLHRNMTF obtains higher average AUC values than other baseline models. Moreover, the case studies on breast neoplasms and lung neoplasms further demonstrate the accuracy of SPLHRNMTF. Meanwhile, the potential associations discovered are of biological significance.
The sustainable development of the citrus industry is greatly affected by citrus canker, an important bacterial disease. To explore the transcriptional regulatory mechanism of citrus resistance to canker disease, this study used the susceptible Citrus sinensis cv. 'Newhall' and its citrus canker-resistant bud mutation variety 'Longhuitian' (LHT) as materials. Through analysing the variances in leaf phenotypes between Newhall and LHT, as well as the variations in their transcriptional expression under Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri (Xcc) inoculation, our study concluded that LHT displays markedly greater resistance to Xcc compared to Newhall. Additionally, the spongy parenchyma of LHT leaves is significantly thicker than that of Newhall, and the stomatal number is significantly higher in LHT leaves, while the length and width of individual stomata in LHT leaves are significantly smaller than those in Newhall. RNA-seq analysis indicates that the differentially expressed genes between LHT and Newhall are involved in biotic stress-related biological processes, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, as well as phytohormone signalling pathways. Furthermore, significant differences were observed in reactive oxygen metabolism and phenylalanine metabolism pathways. The findings of our study provide data support for a deeper understanding of the citrus-Xcc interactions and offer valuable clues for unravelling citrus resistance to citrus canker.
BackgroundGenes exist in a population in a variety of forms (alleles), as a consequence of multiple mutation events that have arisen over the course of time. In this work we consider a locus that is subject to either multiplicative or additive selection, and has n alleles, where n can take the values 2, 3, 4, & mldr;\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\ldots$$\end{document}. We focus on determining the probability of fixation of each of the n alleles. For n=2\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$n = 2$$\end{document} alleles, analytical results, that are 'exact', under the diffusion approximation, can be found for the fixation probability. However generally there are no equally exact results for n >= 3\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$n \ge 3$$\end{document} alleles. In the absence of such exact results, we proceed by finding results for the fixation probability, under the diffusion approximation, as a power series in scaled strengths of selection such as Ri,j=2Ne(si-sj)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$R_{i,j}=2N_{e}(s_{i}-s_{j})$$\end{document}, where Ne\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$N_{e}$$\end{document} is the effective population size, while si\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$s_{i}$$\end{document} and sj\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$s_{j}$$\end{document} are the selection coefficients associated with alleles i and j, respectively.ResultsWe determined the fixation probability when all terms up to second order in the Ri,j\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$R_{i,j}$$\end{document} are kept. The truncation of the power series requires that the Ri,j\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$R_{i,j}$$\end{document} cannot be indefinitely large.
BackgroundRecent analysis of the human proteome via proteogenomics and ribosome profiling of the transcriptome revealed the existence of thousands of previously unannotated microprotein-coding small open reading frames (smORFs). Most functional microproteins were chosen for characterization because of their evolutionary conservation. However, one example of a non-conserved immunomodulatory microprotein in mice suggests that strict sequence conservation misses some intriguing microproteins.ResultsWe examine the ability of gene regulation to identify human microproteins with potential roles in inflammation or fibrosis of the intestine. To do this, we collected ribosome profiling data of intestinal cell lines and peripheral blood mononuclear cells and used gene expression of microprotein-encoding transcripts to identify strongly regulated microproteins, including several examples of microproteins that are only conserved with primates.ConclusionThis approach reveals a number of new microproteins worthy of additional functional characterization and provides a dataset that can be queried in different ways to find additional gut microproteins of interest.
Background Alpaca is a domestic South American camelid probably arising from the domestication of two wild camelids, the vicugna and the guanaco. Two phenotypes are described for alpaca, known as huacaya and suri. Huacaya fleece is characterized by compact, soft, and highly crimped fibers, while suri fleece is longer, straight, less crimped, and lustrous. The gene variants determining these phenotypes are still unknown, although previous studies suggested a dominant inheritance of the suri. Based on that, the aim of this study was the identification of the gene variants determining alpaca coat phenotypes through whole genome sequencing (WGS) analysis. Results The sample used includes two test-cross alpaca families, suri x huacaya, which produced two offspring, one with the suri phenotype and one with the huacaya phenotype. The analyzed sample was expanded through the addition of WGS data from six vicugnas and six guanacos; this because we assumed the absence of the gene variants linked to the suri phenotype in these wild species. The analysis of gene variant segregation with the suri phenotype, coupled with the filtering of gene variants present in the wild species, disclosed the presence in all the suri samples of a premature termination codon (PTC) in TRPV3 (transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 3), a gene known to be involved in hair growth and cycling, thermal sensation, cold tolerance and adaptation in several species. Mutations in TRPV3 were previously associated with the alteration of hair structure leading to an impaired formation of the hair canal and the hair shaft in mouse. This PTC in TRPV3, due to a G > T substitution (p.Glu475*), results in a loss of 290 amino acids from the canonical translated protein, plausibly leading to a physiological dysfunction. Conclusion The present results suggest that the suri phenotype may arise from a TRPV3 gene variant which may explain some of the suri features such as its longer hair fibre with lower number of cuticular scales compared to huacaya.
BackgroundThe ovary is a central organ in the reproductive system that produces oocytes and synthesizes and secretes steroid hormones. Healthy development and regular cyclical change in the ovary is crucial for regulating reproductive processes. However, the key genes and metabolites that regulate ovarian development and pregnancy have not been fully elucidated. This study conducted high-throughput RNA sequencing and untargeted metabolite profiling of the ovarian tissues from Chenghua pigs at four stages, including postnatal day 3 (D3), puberty at the age of about 125 days (Pub), sexual maturity at the age of about 365 days (Y1), and 105 days after pregnancy at the age of about 360 days (Pre).ResultsA total of 9,264 and 1,593 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified during ovarian development and pregnancy. Several key genes involved in ovarian development, including SQLE, HMGCS1, MSMO1, SCARB1, CYP11A1, HSD3B1, HSD17B1, and SERPINE1 were identified. Similarly, LUM, FN1, PLAUR, SELP, SDC1, and VCAN were considered to be associated with pregnancy maintenance. Overexpression of HSD17B1 in granulosa cells significantly upregulated estrogen synthesis-related genes (HSD3B1, CYP11A1, and STAR); meanwhile, overexpression of PLAUR promotes granulosa cell proliferation. Furthermore, 66, 24, 77, and 7 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMis) were found, leading to the selection of key miRNAs such as ssc-miR-206, ssc-miR-107, ssc-miR-429, ssc-miR-210, and ssc-miR-133a-3p by differential miRNA-targeted mRNA interaction network; meanwhile, ssc-miR-133a-3p was validated to have a targeting relationship with KCNA1 by dual-luciferase reporter systems assay. At the metabolic levels, androstenedione, 17a-hydroxyprogesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone, and progesterone were identified, with their synthesis regulated by these DEGs in the ovarian steroidogenesis pathway. Furthermore, treatment of cells with androstenedione upregulated the expression of HSD3B1, CYP11A1, and STAR.ConclusionsThis study revealed the dynamic changes in the transcriptome and metabolome of pig ovaries across developmental stages and gestation, indicating that it may provide new theoretical insights for improving sow fertility.
The interactions between the rumen microbiota and the host are crucial for the digestive and absorptive processes of ruminants, and they are heavily influenced by the climatic conditions of their habitat. Owing to the harsh conditions of the high-altitude habitat, little is known about how ruminants regulate the host transcriptome and the composition of their rumen microbiota. Using the model species of goats, we examined the variations in the rumen microbiota, transcriptome regulation, and climate of the environment between high altitude (Lhasa, Xizang; 3650 m) and low altitude (Chengdu, Sichuan, China; 500 m) goats. The results of 16 S rRNA sequencing revealed variations in the abundance, diversity, and composition of rumen microbiota. Papillibacter, Quinella, and Saccharofermentans were chosen as potential microbes for the adaptation of Xizang goats to the harsh climate of the plateau by the Spearman correlation study of climate and microbiota. Based on rumen transcriptome sequencing analysis, 244 genes were found to be differentially expressed between Xizang goats and low-altitude goats, with 127 genes showing up-regulation and 117 genes showing down-regulation. SLC26A9, GPX3, ARRDC4, and COX1 were identified as potential candidates for plateau adaptation in Xizang goats. Moreover, the metabolism of fatty acids, arachidonic acids, pathway involving cytokines and their receptors could be essential for adaptation to plateau hypoxia and cold endurance. The expression of GPX3, a gene linked to plateau acclimatization in Xizang goats, was linked to the abundance of Anaerovibrio, and the expression of SLC26A9 was linked to the quantity of Selenomonas, according to ruminal microbiota and host Spearman correlation analysis. Our findings imply that in order to adapt harsh plateau conditions, Xizang goats have evolved to maximize digestion and absorption as well as to have a rumen microbiota suitable for the composition of their diet.
The nutritional quality and yield of oats (Avena sativa) are often compromised by plant diseases such as red leaf, powdery mildew, and leaf spot. Sugars Will Eventually be Exported Transporters (SWEETs) are newly identified sugar transporters involved in regulating plant growth and stress responses. However, the roles of SWEET genes in biotic stress responses remain uncharacterized in oats. In this study, 13 AsSWEET genes were identified across nine chromosomes of the oat genome, all of which were predicted to contain seven transmembrane regions. Phylogenetic analysis revealed four clades of AsSWEET proteins, with high homology to SWEET proteins in the Poaceae family. Collinearity analysis demonstrated strong relationships between oat and Zea mays SWEETs. Using subcellular localization prediction tools, AsSWEET proteins were predicted to localize to the plasma membrane. Promoter analysis revealed cis-acting elements associated with light response, growth, and stress regulation. Six AsSWEET proteins were predicted to interact in a network centered on AsSWEET1a and AsSWEET11. Gene expression analysis of two oat varieties, 'ForagePlus' and 'Molasses', indicated significant expression differences in several AsSWEET genes following infection with powdery mildew or leaf spot, including AsSWEET1a, AsSWEET1b, AsSWEET2b, AsSWEET3a, AsSWEET11, and AsSWEET16. These SWEET genes are potential candidates for disease resistance in oats. This study provides a foundation for understanding the regulatory mechanisms of AsSWEET genes, particularly in response to powdery mildew and leaf spot, and offers insights for enhancing oat molecular breeding.
BackgroundLameness is a collective term for multiple foot diseases in cattle including, but not limited to, foot rot (FR), digital dermatitis (DD), and toe tip necrosis (TTN), which is a critical welfare concern. The diagnosis of specific phenotypes of lameness in feedlot cattle is challenging and primarily relies on visual assessments. However, different lameness phenotypes share similar clinical symptoms and there is a limited understanding of potential biomarkers relating to such disease for further molecular diagnosis. This study aimed to identify blood miRNA profiles of feedlot cattle with various lameness phenotypes and whether they could be potential diagnostic markers to differentiate lameness phenotypes and predictive lameness recovery.ResultsMicroRNAome profiles were generated for the whole blood samples collected from feedlot cattle at Week 0 (W0) before treatment (n = 106) and longitudinal miRNA expression profiles relating to lameness recovery from W0 to W2 (n = 140) using RNA-seq. Ten miRNAs were selected to verify miRNA sequencing accuracy using stem-loop RT-qPCR. A total of 321 miRNAs were identified to be expressed in bovine blood samples with three (all downregulated, average log2fold change = -1.32), seven (two downregulated with average log2fold change = -1.15, five upregulated with average log2fold change = 1.68), six (three downregulated with average log2fold change = -1.23, three upregulated with average log2fold change = 3.31), and fourteen (eight downregulated with average log2fold change = -1.24, six upregulated with average log2fold change = 1.26) miRNAs differentially expressed (DE) miRNAs in DD, FR, TTN, and FR combined with DD (FRDD) compared to healthy control at W0 (defined as pre-treatment DE miRNAs), respectively. The predicted functions of identified DE miRNAs among different lameness phenotypes were mainly related to Zinc-finger, muscle cell development, and host inflammatory responses. Furthermore, the longitudinal miRNA expression profiles revealed that a total of eight miRNA changed patterns from W0 to W2, with the BTB/POZ-like domain being the most enriched function by longitudinal miRNA expression profiles in both unrecovered and recovered cattle. A total of nine miRNAs (five downregulated with average log2fold change = -2.4, four upregulated with average log2fold change = 3.7) from W0 to W2 were differentially expressed in unrecovered cattle compared to the recovered cattle, with functions associated with transcription regulation and Zinc-finger. Moreover, the area under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve (AUC) revealed that pre-treatment DE miRNAs could serve as good diagnostic markers to differentiate any two of four phenotypes of lameness, with bta-miR-339b being able to differentiate all lameness phenotypes. Moreover, pre-treatment DE miRNAs could also predict the recovery of three lameness phenotypes (DD, FRDD, TTN) with good to excellent predictiveness.ConclusionOur results comprehensively assessed the blood miRNAomes in response to various lameness phenotypes, promoting the understanding of miRNA-regulated mechanisms of lameness in feedlot cattle. The diagnostic miRNA markers were also identified to differentiate within lameness phenotypes and predictive lameness recovery, shedding light on accurate on-farm lameness detection.
Background Greater yam is a key staple crop grown in tropical and subtropical regions, while its asexual propagation mode had led to non-flowering mutations. How transposable elements contribute to its genetic variations is rarely analyzed. We used transcriptome and whole genome sequencing data to identify active transposable elements (TEs) and genetic variation caused by these active TEs. Our aim was to shed light on which TEs would lead to its intraspecies variation. Results Annotation of de novo assembly transcripts indicated that 0.8 - 0.9% of transcripts were TE related, with LTR retrotransposons (LTR-RTs) accounted for 65% TE transcripts. A large portion of these transcripts were non-autonomous TEs, which had incomplete functional domains. The majority of mapped transcripts were distributed in genic deficient regions, with 9% of TEs overlapping with genic regions. Moreover, over 90% TE transcripts exhibited low expression levels and insufficient reads coverage to support full-length structure assembly. Subfamily analysis of Copia and Gypsy, the two LTR-RTs revealed that a small number of subfamilies contained a significantly larger number of members, which play a key role in generating TE transcript. Based on resequencing data, 15,002 L-RT insertion loci were detected for active LTR-RT members. The insertion loci of LTR-RTs were highly divergent among greater yam accessions. Conclusions This study showed the ongoing transcription and transpositions of TEs in greater yam, despite low transcription levels and incomplete proteins insufficient for autonomous transposition. While our research did not directly link these TEs to specific yam traits such as tuber yield and propagation mode, it lays a crucial foundation for further research on how these TE insertion polymorphisms (TIPs) might be related to variations in greater yam traits and its tuber propagation mode. Future research may explore the potential roles of TEs in trait variations, such as tuber yield and stress resistance, in greater yam.
Background Chickpea is prone to many abiotic stresses such as heat, drought, salinity, etc. which cause severe loss in yield. Tolerance towards these stresses is quantitative in nature and many studies have been done to map the loci influencing these traits in different populations using different markers. This study is an attempt to meta-analyse those reported loci projected over a high-density consensus map to provide a more accurate information on the regions influencing heat, drought, cold and salinity tolerance in chickpea.Results A meta-analysis of QTL reported to be responsible for tolerance to drought, heat, cold and salinity stress tolerance in chickpeas was done. A total of 1512 QTL responsible for the concerned abiotic stress tolerance were collected from literature, of which 1189 were projected on a chickpea consensus genetic map. The QTL meta-analysis predicted 59 MQTL spread over all 8 chromosomes, responsible for these 4 kinds of abiotic stress tolerance in chickpea. The physical locations of 23 MQTL were validated by various marker-trait associations and genome-wide association studies. Out of these reported MQTL, CaMQAST1.1, CaMQAST4.1, CaMQAST4.4, CaMQAST7.8, and CaMQAST8.2 were suggested to be useful for different breeding approaches as they were responsible for high per cent variance explained (PVE), had small intervals and encompassed a large number of originally reported QTL. Many putative candidate genes that might be responsible for directly or indirectly conferring abiotic stress tolerance were identified in the region covered by 4 major MQTL- CaMQAST1.1, CaMQAST4.4, CaMQAST7.7, and CaMQAST6.4, such as heat shock proteins, auxin and gibberellin response factors, etc.Conclusion The results of this study should be useful for the breeders and researchers to develop new chickpea varieties which are tolerant to drought, heat, cold, and salinity stresses.
Background Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) is the most cultivated forage legume around the world. Under a variety of growing conditions, forage yield in alfalfa is stymied by biotic and abiotic stresses including heat, salt, drought, and disease. Given the sessile nature of plants, they use strategies including, but not limited to, differential gene expression to respond to environmental cues. Transcription factors control the expression of genes that contribute to or enable tolerance and survival during periods of stress. Basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors have been demonstrated to play a critical role in regulating plant growth and development as well as mediate the responses to abiotic stress in several species, including Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Lotus japonicus and Medicago truncatula. However, there is little information about bZIP transcription factors in cultivated alfalfa. Result In the present study, 237 bZIP genes were identified in alfalfa from publicly available sequencing data. Multiple sequence alignments showed the presence of intact bZIP motifs in the identified sequences. Based on previous phylogenetic analyses in A. thaliana, alfalfa bZIPs were similarly divided and fell into 10 groups. The physico-chemical properties, motif analysis and phylogenetic study of the alfalfa bZIPs revealed high specificity within groups. The differential expression of alfalfa bZIPs in a suite of tissues indicates that bZIP genes are specifically expressed at different developmental stages in alfalfa. Similarly, expression analysis in response to ABA, cold, drought and salt stresses, indicates that a subset of bZIP genes are also differentially expressed and likely play a role in abiotic stress signaling and/or tolerance. RT-qPCR analysis on selected genes further verified these differential expression patterns. Conclusions Taken together, this work provides a framework for the future study of bZIPs in alfalfa and presents candidate bZIPs involved in stress-response signaling.
Background Oil bodies or lipid droplets (LDs) in the cytosol are the subcellular storage compartments of seeds and the sites of lipid metabolism providing energy to the germinating seeds. Major LD-associated proteins are lipoxygenases, phospholipaseD, oleosins, TAG-lipases, steroleosins, caleosins and SEIPINs; involved in facilitating germination and enhancing peroxidation resulting in off-flavours. However, how natural selection is balancing contradictory processes in lipid-rich seeds remains evasive. The present study was aimed at the prediction of selection signatures among orthologous clades in major oilseeds and the correlation of selection effect with gene expression. Results The LD-associated genes from the major oil-bearing crops were analyzed to predict natural selection signatures in phylogenetically close-knit ortholog clusters to understand adaptive evolution. Positive selection was the major force driving the evolution and diversification of orthologs in a lineage-specific manner. Significant positive selection effects were found in 94 genes particularly in oleosin and TAG-lipases, purifying with excess of non-synonymous substitution in 44 genes while 35 genes were neutral to selection effects. No significant selection impact was noticed in Brassicaceae as against LOX genes of oil palm. A heavy load of deleterious mutations affecting selection signatures was detected in T-lineage oleosins and LOX genes of Arachis hypogaea. The T-lineage oleosin genes were involved in mainly anther, tapetum and anther wall morphogenesis. In Ricinus communis and Sesamum indicum > 85% of PLD genes were under selection whereas selection pressures were low in Brassica juncea and Helianthus annuus. Steroleosin, caleosin and SEIPINs with large roles in lipid droplet organization expressed mostly in seeds and were under considerable positive selection pressures. Expression divergence was evident among paralogs and homeologs with one gene attaining functional superiority compared to the other. The LOX gene Glyma.13g347500 associated with off-flavor was not expressed during germination, rather its paralog Glyma.13g347600 showed expression in Glycine max. PLD-alpha genes were expressed on all the tissues except the seed,delta genes in seed and meristem while beta and gamma genes expressed in the leaf. Conclusions The genes involved in seed germination and lipid metabolism were under strong positive selection, although species differences were discernable. The present study identifies suitable candidate genes enhancing seed oil content and germination wherein directional selection can become more fruitful.
Background Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC), including Mycobacterium intracellulare is a member of slow-growing mycobacteria and contributes to a substantial proportion of nontuberculous mycobacterial lung disease in humans affecting immunocompromised and elderly populations. Adaptation of pathogens in hostile environments is crucial in establishing infection and persistence within the host. However, the sophisticated cellular and molecular mechanisms of stress response in M. intracellulare still need to be fully explored. We aimed to elucidate the transcriptional response of M. intracellulare under acidic and oxidative stress conditions. Results At the transcriptome level, 80 genes were shown [FC] >= 2.0 and p < 0.05 under oxidative stress with 10 mM hydrogen peroxide. Specifically, 77 genes were upregulated, while 3 genes were downregulated. In functional analysis, oxidative stress conditions activate DNA replication, nucleotide excision repair, mismatch repair, homologous recombination, and tuberculosis pathways. Additionally, our results demonstrate that DNA replication and repair system genes, such as dnaB, dinG, urvB, uvrD2, and recA, are indispensable for resistance to oxidative stress. On the contrary, 878 genes were shown [FC] >= 2.0 and p < 0.05 under acidic stress with pH 4.5. Among these genes, 339 were upregulated, while 539 were downregulated. Functional analysis highlighted nitrogen and sulfur metabolism pathways as the primary responses to acidic stress. Our findings provide evidence of the critical role played by nitrogen and sulfur metabolism genes in the response to acidic stress, including narGHIJ, nirBD, narU, narK3, cysND, cysC, cysH, ferredoxin 1 and 2, and formate dehydrogenase. Conclusion Our results suggest the activation of several pathways potentially critical for the survival of M. intracellulare under a hostile microenvironment within the host. This study indicates the importance of stress responses in M. intracellulare infection and identifies promising therapeutic targets.
Metal contamination of aquatic environments remains a major concern due to their persistence. The water flea Daphnia magna is an important model species for metal toxicity studies and water quality assessment. However, most research has focused on physiological endpoints such as mortality, growth, and reproduction in laboratory settings, as well as neglected toxicogenomic responses. Copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) are essential trace elements that play crucial roles in many biological processes, including iron metabolism, connective tissue formation, neurotransmitter synthesis, DNA synthesis, and immune function. Excess amounts of these metals result in deviations from homeostasis and may induce toxic responses. In this study, we analyzed Daphnia magna transcriptomic responses to IC5 levels of Cu (120 mu g/L) and Zn (300 mu g/L) in environmental water obtained from a pristine lake with adjusted water hardness (150 mg/L CaCO3). The study was carried out to gain insights into the Cu and Zn regulated stress response mechanisms in Daphnia magna at transcriptome level. A total of 2,688 and 3,080 genes were found to be differentially expressed (DEG) between the control and Cu and the control and Zn, respectively. There were 1,793 differentially expressed genes in common for both Cu and Zn, whereas the number of unique DEGs for Cu and Zn were 895 and 1,287, respectively. Gene ontology and KEGG pathways enrichment were carried out to identify the molecular functions and biological processes affected by metal exposures. In addition to well-known biomarkers, novel targets for metal toxicity screening at the genomic level were identified.
BackgroundImmunotherapy is a practical therapeutic approach in breast cancer (BRCA), and the role of FLI1 in immune regulation has gradually been unveiled. However, the specific role of FLI1 in BRCA was conflicted; thus, additional convincing evidence is needed.MethodsWe explored the upstream regulation of FLI1 expression via summary data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR) analysis and ncRNA network construction centering on FLI1 using BRCA genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary data with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) and DNA methylation quantitative trait loci (mQTLs) from the blood and a series of in silico analyses, respectively. We illuminated the downstream function of FLI1 in immune regulation by integrating a series of analyses of single-cell RNA sequence data (scRNA-seq).ResultsWe verified a causal pathway from FLI1 methylation to FLI1 gene expression to BRCA onset and demonstrated that FLI1 was downregulated in BRCA. FLI1, a transcription factor, served as myeloid and T cells' communication regulator by targeting immune-related ligands and receptor transcription in BRCA tissues. We constructed a ceRNA network centering on FLI1 that consisted of three LncRNAs (CKMT2-AS1, PSMA3-AS1, and DIO3OS) and a miRNA (hsa-miR-324-5p), and the expression of FLI1 was positively related to a series of immune-related markers, including immune cell infiltration, biomarkers of immune cells, and immune checkpoints.ConclusionLow-methylation-induced or ncRNA-mediated downregulation of FLI1 is associated with poor prognosis, and FLI1 might regulate the tumor immune microenvironment via a cell-type-specific target genes manner in BRCA.
Background Despite its known significance in plant abiotic stress responses, the role of the RAV gene family in the response of Capsicum annuum to chilling stress remains largely unexplored. Results In this study, we identified and characterized six members of the CaRAV gene subfamily in pepper plants through genome-wide analysis. Subsequently, the CaRAV subfamily was classified into four branches based on homology with Arabidopsis thaliana, each exhibiting relatively conserved domains within the branch. We discovered that light response elements accounted for the majority of CaRAVs, whereas low-temperature response elements were specific to the NGA gene subfamily. After pepper plants were subjected to chilling stress, qRT-PCR analysis revealed that CaRAV1, CaRAV2 and CaNGA1 were significantly induced in response to chilling stress, indicating that CaRAVs play a role in the response to chilling stress. Using virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) vectors, we targeted key members of the CaRAV gene family. Under normal growth conditions, the MDA content and SOD enzyme activity of the silenced plants were slightly greater than those of the control plants, and the REC activity was significantly greater than that of the control plants. The levels of MDA and electrolyte leakage were greater in the silenced plants after they were exposed to chilling stress, and the POD and CAT enzyme activities were significantly lower than those in the control, which was particularly evident under repeated chilling stress. In addition, the relative expression of CaPOD and CaCAT was greater in V2 plants upon repeated chilling stress, especially CaCAT was significantly greater in V2 plants than in the other two silenced plants, with 3.29 and 1.10 increases within 12 and 24 h. These findings suggest that CaRAV1 and CaNGA1 positively regulate the response to chilling stress. Conclusions Silencing of key members of the CaRAV gene family results in increased susceptibility to chilling damage and reduced antioxidant enzyme activity in plants, particularly under repeated chilling stress. This study provides valuable information for understanding the classification and putative functions of RAV transcription factors in pepper plants.
BackgroundTrends in the development of genetic markers for the purposes of genomic and marker-assisted selection primarily focus on identifying causative polymorphisms. Using these polymorphisms as markers enables a more accurate association between genotype and phenotype. Bioinformatic analysis allows calculating the impact of missense polymorphisms on the structural and functional characteristics of proteins, which makes it promising for identifying causative polymorphisms. In this study, a bioinformatic approach is applied to evaluate and differentiate polymorphisms based on their causality in genes that affect the production traits of pigs and cows, which are two important livestock species.ResultsThe influence of both known causative and candidate missense polymorphisms in the MC4R, NR6A1, PRKAG3, RYR1, and SYNGR2 genes of pigs, as well as the ABCG2, DGAT1, GHR, and MSTN genes of cows, was assessed. The study included an evaluation of the effect of polymorphisms on protein functions, considering the evolutionary and physicochemical characteristics of amino acids at polymorphic sites. Additionally, it examined the impact of polymorphisms on the stability of tertiary protein structures, including changes in folding, binding of protein monomers, and interaction with ligands.ConclusionsThe comprehensive bioinformatic analysis used in this study enables the differentiation of polymorphisms into neutral, where both amino acids in the polymorphic site do not significantly affect the structure and function of the protein, and causative, where one of the amino acids significantly impacts the protein's properties. This approach can be employed in future research to screen extensive sets of polymorphisms in animal genomes, identifying the most promising polymorphisms for further investigation in association studies.
While single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) allows researchers to analyze gene expression in individual cells, its unique characteristics like over-dispersion, zero-inflation, high gene-gene correlation, and large data volume with many features pose challenges for most existing feature selection methods. In this paper, we present a feature selection method based on neural network (scFSNN) to solve classification problem for the scRNA-seq data. scFSNN is an embedded method that can automatically select features (genes) during model training, control the false discovery rate of selected features and adaptively determine the number of features to be eliminated. Extensive simulation and real data studies demonstrate its excellent feature selection ability and predictive performance.
BackgroundThe yak is a symbol of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau and provides important basic resources for human life on the plateau. Domestic yaks have been subjected to strong artificial selection and environmental pressures over the long-term. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of phenotypic differences in yak populations can reveal key functional genes involved in the domestication process and improve genetic breeding.Material and methodHere, we re-sequenced 80 yaks (Maiwa, Yushu, and Huanhu populations) to identify single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as genetic variants. After filtering and quality control, remaining SNPs were kept to identify the genome-wide regions of selective sweeps associated with domestic traits. The four methods (pi, XPEHH, iHS, and XP-nSL) were used to detect the population genetic separation.ResultsBy comparing the differences in the population stratification, linkage disequilibrium decay rate, and characteristic selective sweep signals, we identified 203 putative selective regions of domestic traits, 45 of which were mapped to 27 known genes. They were clustered into 4 major GO biological process terms. All known genes were associated with seven major domestication traits, such as dwarfism (ANKRD28), milk (HECW1, HECW2, and OSBPL2), meat (SPATA5 and GRHL2), fertility (BTBD11 and ARFIP1), adaptation (NCKAP5, ANTXR1, LAMA5, OSBPL2, AOC2, and RYR2), growth (GRHL2, GRID2, SMARCAL1, and EPHB2), and the immune system (INPP5D and ADCYAP1R1).ConclusionsWe provided there is an obvious genetic different among domestic progress in these three yak populations. Our findings improve the understanding of the major genetic switches and domestic processes among yak populations.
Goats have achieved global prominence as essential livestock since their initial domestication, primarily owing to their remarkable adaptability to diverse environmental and production systems. Differential selection pressures influenced by climate have led to variations in their physical attributes, leaving genetic imprints within the genomes of goat breeds raised in diverse agroecological settings. In light of this, our study pursued a comprehensive analysis, merging environmental data with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variations, to unearth indications of selection shaped by climate-mediated forces in goats. Through the examination of 43,300 SNPs from 51 indigenous goat breeds adapting to different climatic conditions using four analytical methods: latent factor mixed models (LFMM), F-statistics (Fst), Extended haplotype homozygosity across populations (XPEHH), and spatial analysis method (SAM), A total of 74 genes were revealed to display clear signs of selection, which are believed to be influenced by climatic conditions. Among these genes, 32 were consistently identified by at least two of the applied methods, and three genes (DENND1A, PLCB1, and ITPR2) were confirmed by all four approaches. Moreover, our investigation yielded 148 Gene Ontology (GO) terms based on these 74 genes, underlining pivotal biological pathways crucial for environmental adaptation. These pathways encompass functions like vascular smooth muscle contraction, cellular response to heat, GTPase regulator activity, rhythmic processes, and responses to temperature stimuli. Of significance, GO terms about endocrine regulation and energy metabolic responses, key for local adaptation were also uncovered, including biological processes, such as cell differentiation, regulation of peptide hormone secretion, and lipid metabolism. These findings contribute to our knowledge of the genetic structure of climate-triggered adaptation across the goat genome and have practical implications for marker-assisted breeding in goats.
Understanding the genomic characteristics of livestock is crucial for improving breeding efficiency and conservation efforts. However, there is a relative lack of information on the genetic makeup of local goat breeds in Henan, China. In this study, we identified runs of homozygosity (ROH), genomic inbreeding coefficients (FROH), and selection signatures in four breeds including Funiu White (FNW), Huai (HG), Lushan Bullleg (LS), and Taihang black (THB). The genomic analysis utilized a dataset of 46,278 SNP markers and 102 animals. A total of 342, 567, 1285, and 180 ROH segments were detected in FNW, HG, LS, and THB, respectively, with an average of 15.55, 29.84, 32.95, and 8.18 segments per individual. The lengths of ROH segments varied from 69.36 Mb in THB to 417.06 Mb in LS, with the most common lengths being 2-4 Mb and 4-8 Mb. The highest number of longest ROH segments (> 16 Mb) were found in LS (328) and the highest average FROH value was observed in LS (0.173), followed by HG (0.128), while the lowest FROH values were in THB (0.029) and FNW (0.070). Furthermore, the analysis of ROH islands and Composite Likelihood Ratio (CLR) identified a total of 175 significant genes. Among these, 25 genes were found to overlap, detected by both methods. These genes were associated with a diverse range of traits including reproductive ability (GPRIN3), weight (CCSER1), immune response (HERC5 and TIGD2), embryo development (NAP1L5), environmental adaptation (KLHL3, TRHDE, and IFNGR1), and milk characteristics (FAM13A). Significant Gene Ontology (GO) terms related to embryo skeletal system morphogenesis, brain ventricle development, and growth were also identified. This study helps reveal the genetic architecture of Henan goat breeds and provides valuable insights for the effective conservation and breeding programs of local goat breeds in Henan.
BackgroundTranscription factor lark has been demonstrated to play multiple functions in Drosophila, but the function of this gene in embryonic development remains to be elucidated.ResultsIn this study, the CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing method was used to construct a Bmlark mutant strain of Bombyx mori to investigate the roles of this gene. The results showed that the homozygous mutant Bmlark-/- was lethal. The Bmlark-/- embryos showed obvious developmental defects, such as defective sclerotization and melanization of the exoskeleton. A transcriptomic comparison of Bmlark-/- and wild-type embryos showed that the differentially expressed genes were mainly enriched in the structure and metabolic processes of chitin and cuticles. While the expression levels of chitin metabolism-related enzyme genes did not significantly change, in the mutant embryos compared to the wild-type embryos, the expression levels of 63 putative cuticle protein genes showed significant differences. Among which, 35 genes were downregulated and 28 genes were upregulated. The expression levels of the transcription factor BmPOUM2 and eight wing disc cuticle protein genes (WCP) also changed. BmPOUM2, WCP5, WCP9, WCP10, WCP11 were downregulated and WCP1, WCP2, WCP3, WCP6 were upregulated in Bmlark-/- embryos. While the expression level of TH in the tyrosine-mediated pigmentation pathway was upregulated in the mutant embryos, the expression levels of the four key pigment synthesis genes DDC, aaNAT, Laccase2A, and yellow-f2 were significantly downregulated.ConclusionsThe expression levels of 63 putative cuticle protein genes, eight WCP genes, and five pigment synthesis genes significantly changed in Bmlark mutant B. mori compared to those of the wildtype. These results suggest that Bmlark is essential for normal development of cuticle and tyrosine-mediated melanization in silkworm embryos.
Background Ruptured atherosclerotic plaques often precipitate severe ischemic events, such as stroke and myocardial infarction. Unraveling the intricate molecular mechanisms governing vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) behavior in plaque stabilization remains a formidable challenge.Methods In this study, we leveraged single-cell and transcriptomic datasets from atherosclerotic plaques retrieved from the gene expression omnibus (GEO) database. Employing a combination of single-cell population differential analysis, weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), and transcriptome differential analysis techniques, we identified specific genes steering the transformation of VSMCs in atherosclerotic plaques. Diagnostic models were developed and validated through gene intersection, utilizing the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) and random forest (RF) methods. Nomograms for plaque assessment were constructed. Tissue localization and expression validation were performed on specimens from animal models, utilizing immunofluorescence co-localization, western blot, and reverse-transcription quantitative-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). Various online databases were harnessed to predict transcription factors (TFs) and their interacting compounds, with determination of the cell-specific localization of TF expression using single-cell data.Results Following rigorous quality control procedures, we obtained a total of 40,953 cells, with 6,261 representing VSMCs. The VSMC population was subsequently clustered into 5 distinct subpopulations. Analyzing inter-subpopulation cellular communication, we focused on the SMC2 and SMC5 subpopulations. Single-cell subpopulation and WGCNA analyses revealed significant module enrichments, notably in collagen-containing extracellular matrix and cell-substrate junctions. Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4 (IGFBP4), apolipoprotein E (APOE), and cathepsin C (CTSC) were identified as potential diagnostic markers for early and advanced plaques. Notably, gene expression pattern analysis suggested that IGFBP4 might serve as a protective gene, a hypothesis validated through tissue localization and expression analysis. Finally, we predicted TFs capable of binding to IGFBP4, with Kr & uuml;ppel-like family 15 (KLF15) emerging as a prominent candidate showing relative specificity within smooth muscle cells. Predictions about compounds associated with affecting KLF15 expression were also made.Conclusion Our study established a plaque diagnostic and assessment model and analyzed the molecular interaction mechanisms of smooth muscle cells within plaques. Further analysis revealed that the transcription factor KLF15 may regulate the biological behaviors of smooth muscle cells through the KLF15/IGFBP4 axis, thereby influencing the stability of advanced plaques via modulation of the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway. This could potentially serve as a target for plaque stability assessment and therapy, thus driving advancements in the management and treatment of atherosclerotic plaques.
Background Control and elimination of schistosomiasis is an arduous task, with current strategies proving inadequate to break transmission. Exploration of genetic approaches to interrupt Schistosoma mansoni transmission, the causative agent for human intestinal schistosomiasis in sub-Saharan Africa and South America, has led to genomic research of the snail vector hosts of the genus Biomphalaria. Few complete genomic resources exist, with African Biomphalaria species being particularly underrepresented despite this being where the majority of S. mansoni infections occur. Here we generate and annotate the first genome assembly of Biomphalaria sudanica sensu lato, a species responsible for S. mansoni transmission in lake and marsh habitats of the African Rift Valley. Supported by whole-genome diversity data among five inbred lines, we describe orthologs of immune-relevant gene regions in the South American vector B. glabrata and present a bioinformatic pipeline to identify candidate novel pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs). Results De novo genome and transcriptome assembly of inbred B. sudanica originating from the shoreline of Lake Victoria (Kisumu, Kenya) resulted in a haploid genome size of similar to 944.2 Mb (6,728 fragments, N50 = 1.067 Mb), comprising 23,598 genes (BUSCO = 93.6% complete). The B. sudanica genome contains orthologues to all described immune genes/regions tied to protection against S. mansoni in B. glabrata, including the polymorphic transmembrane clusters (PTC1 and PTC2), RADres, and other loci. The B. sudanica PTC2 candidate immune genomic region contained many PRR-like genes across a much wider genomic region than has been shown in B. glabrata, as well as a large inversion between species. High levels of intra-species nucleotide diversity were seen in PTC2, as well as in regions linked to PTC1 and RADres orthologues. Immune related and putative PRR gene families were significantly over-represented in the sub-set of B. sudanica genes determined as hyperdiverse, including high extracellular diversity in transmembrane genes, which could be under pathogen-mediated balancing selection. However, no overall expansion in immunity related genes was seen in African compared to South American lineages. Conclusions The B. sudanica genome and analyses presented here will facilitate future research in vector immune defense mechanisms against pathogens. This genomic/transcriptomic resource provides necessary data for the future development of molecular snail vector control/surveillance tools, facilitating schistosome transmission interruption mechanisms in Africa.
Background CINNAMYL ALCOHOL DEHYDROGENASE (CAD) catalyzes the NADPH-dependent reduction of cinnamaldehydes into cinnamyl alcohols and is a key enzyme found at the final step of the monolignol pathway. Cinnamyl alcohols and their conjugates are subsequently polymerized in the secondary cell wall to form lignin. CAD genes are typically encoded by multi-gene families and thus traditionally organized into general classifications of functional relevance. Results In silico analysis of the hexaploid Triticum aestivum genome revealed 47 high confidence TaCAD copies, of which three were determined to be the most significant isoforms (class I) considered bone fide CADs. Class I CADs were expressed throughout development both in RNAseq data sets as well as via qRT-PCR analysis. Of the 37 class II TaCADs identified, two groups were observed to be significantly co-expressed with class I TaCADs in developing tissue and under chitin elicitation in RNAseq data sets. These co-expressed class II TaCADs were also found to be phylogenetically unrelated to a separate clade of class II TaCADs previously reported to be an influential resistance factor to pathogenic fungal infection. Lastly, two groups were phylogenetically identified as class III TaCADs, which possess distinct conserved gene structures. However, the lack of data supporting their catalytic activity for cinnamaldehydes and their bereft transcriptional presence in lignifying tissues challenges their designation and function as CADs. Conclusions Taken together, our comprehensive transcriptomic analyses suggest that TaCAD genes contribute to overlapping but nonredundant functions during T. aestivum growth and development across a wide variety of agroecosystems and provide tolerance to various stressors.
Fishmeal and fish oil have been the main sources of protein and fatty acid for aquaculture fish. However, their increasing price and low sustainability have led the aquafeed industry to seek sustainable alternative feedstuffs to meet the nutritional requirements of fish and improve their health and performance. Plant proteins have been successfully used to replace fishery derivatives in aquafeeds, but the presence of anti-nutritional substances is a potential drawback of this approach. Thus, it has been reported that phytate breakdown can be caused by feed supplementation with exogenous phytase. The inclusion of microalgae has been proposed to improve gut functionality in fish fed diets with a high vegetable protein content. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect on the growth and gut microbiota of European seabass (Dicentrarchus labrax) juveniles of a diet containing a blend of microalgae (Arthrospira platensis and Nannochloropsis gaditana) and different concentrations of phytase. An 83-day feeding trial was conducted, comprising four experimental diets with 2.5% microalgae and 500, 1,000, 2,000, or 10,000 phytase units (FTU)/kg feed and a microalgae- and phytase-free control diet. At the end of the trial, a significantly increased body weight was observed in fish fed the diet with the highest phytase concentration (10,000 FTU/kg) versus controls, although the gut bacterial composition did not differ from controls in alpha or beta diversity with either majority (Weighted UniFrac) or minority bacterial strains (Unweighted UniFrac). In comparison to the control group, the groups fed diets with 1,000 or 2,000 FTU/kg diets had a lower alpha diversity (Shannon's diversity index), while those fed diets with 500 FTU/kg or 1,000 FTU/kg showed distinct clusters in beta diversity (involving minority ASVs). According to these findings, the diet containing the 2.5% microalgae blend with 10,000 FTU/kg may be useful to increase the aquafeed quality and sustain the growth performance of juvenile European seabass.
BackgroundWith the rise of publicly available genomic data repositories, it is now common for scientists to rely on computational models and preprocessed data, either as control or to discover new knowledge. However, different repositories adhere to the different principles and guidelines, and data processing plays a significant role in the quality of the resulting datasets. Two popular repositories for transcription factor binding sites data - ENCODE and Cistrome - process the same biological samples in alternative ways, and their results are not always consistent. Moreover, the output format of the processing (BED narrowPeak) exposes a feature, the signalValue, which is seldom used in consistency checks, but can offer valuable insight on the quality of the data.ResultsWe provide evidence that data points with high signalValue(s) (top 25% of values) are more likely to be consistent between ENCODE and Cistrome in human cell lines K562, GM12878, and HepG2. In addition, we show that filtering according to said high values improves the quality of predictions for a machine learning algorithm that detects transcription factor interactions based only on positional information. Finally, we provide a set of practices and guidelines, based on the signalValue feature, for scientists who wish to compare and merge narrowPeaks from ENCODE and Cistrome.ConclusionsThe signalValue feature is an informative feature that can be effectively used to highlight consistent areas of overlap between different sources of TF binding sites that expose it. Its applicability extends to downstream to positional machine learning algorithms, making it a powerful tool for performance tweaking and data aggregation.
BackgroundThe Illumina family of Infinium Methylation BeadChip microarrays has been widely used over the last 15 years for genome-wide DNA methylation profiling, including large-scale and population-based studies, due to their ease of use and cost effectiveness. Succeeding the popular HumanMethylationEPIC BeadChip (EPICv1), the recently released Infinium MethylationEPIC v2.0 BeadChip (EPICv2) claims to extend genomic coverage to more than 935,000 CpG sites. Here, we comprehensively characterise the reproducibility, reliability and annotation of the EPICv2 array, based on bioinformatic analysis of both manifest data and new EPICv2 data from diverse biological samples.ResultsWe find a high degree of reproducibility with EPICv1, evidenced by comparable sensitivity and precision from empirical cross-platform comparison incorporating whole genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS), and high correlation between technical sample replicates, including between samples with DNA input levels below the manufacturer's recommendation. We provide a full assessment of probe content, evaluating genomic distribution and changes from previous array versions. We characterise EPICv2's new feature of replicated probes and provide recommendations as to the superior probes. In silico analysis of probe sequences demonstrates that probe cross-hybridisation remains a significant problem in EPICv2. By mapping the off-target sites at single nucleotide resolution and comparing with WGBS we show empirical evidence for preferential off-target binding.ConclusionsOverall, we find EPICv2 a worthy successor to the previous Infinium methylation microarrays, however some technical issues remain. To support optimal EPICv2 data analysis we provide an expanded version of the EPICv2 manifest to aid researchers in understanding probe design, data processing, choosing appropriate probes for analysis and for integration with methylation datasets from previous versions of the Infinium Methylation BeadChip.
Background The search for new bioactive natural compounds with anticancer activity is still of great importance. Even though their potential for diagnostics and treatment of cancer has already been proved, the availability is still limited. Hypericin, a naphthodianthrone isolated essentially from plant source Hypericum perforatum L. along with other related anthraquinones and bisanthraquinones belongs to this group of compounds. Although it has been proven that hypericin is synthesized by the polyketide pathway in plants, none of the candidate genes coding for key enzymes has been experimentally validated yet. Despite the rare occurrence of anthraquinones in plants, their presence in microorganisms, including endophytic fungi, is quite common. Unlike plants, several biosynthetic genes grouped into clusters (BGCs) in fungal endophytes have already been characterized. Results The aim of this work was to predict, identify and characterize the anthraquinone BGCs in de novo assembled and functionally annotated genomes of selected endophytic fungal isolates (Fusarium oxysporum, Plectosphaerella cucumerina, Scedosporium apiospermum, Diaporthe eres, Canariomyces subthermophilus) obtained from different tissues of Hypericum spp. The number of predicted type I polyketide synthase (PKS) BGCs in the studied genomes varied. The non-reducing type I PKS lacking thioesterase domain and adjacent discrete gene encoding protein with product release function were identified only in the genomes of C. subthermophilus and D. eres. A candidate bisanthraquinone BGC was predicted in C. subthermophilus genome and comprised genes coding the enzymes that catalyze formation of the basic anthraquinone skeleton (PKS, metallo-beta-lactamase, decarboxylase, anthrone oxygenase), putative dimerization enzyme (cytochrome P450 monooxygenase), other tailoring enzymes (oxidoreductase, dehydrogenase/reductase), and non-catalytic proteins (fungal transcription factor, transporter protein). Conclusions The results provide an insight into genetic background of anthraquinone biosynthesis in Hypericum-borne endophytes. The predicted bisanthraquinone gene cluster represents a basis for functional validation of the candidate biosynthetic genes in a simple eukaryotic system as a prospective biotechnological alternative for production of hypericin and related bioactive anthraquinones.
Background Nutrient availability during early stages of development (embryogenesis and the first week post-hatch) can have long-term effects on physiological functions and bird metabolism. The embryo develops in a closed structure and depends entirely on the nutrients and energy available in the egg. The aim of this study was to describe the ontogeny of pathways governing hepatic metabolism that mediates many physiological functions in the pHu + and pHu- chicken lines, which are divergently selected for the ultimate pH of meat, a proxy for muscle glycogen stores, and which differ in the nutrient content and composition of eggs. Results We identified eight clusters of genes showing a common pattern of expression between embryonic day 12 (E12) and day 8 (D8) post-hatch. These clusters were not representative of a specific metabolic pathway or function. On E12 and E14, the majority of genes differentially expressed between the pHu + and pHu- lines were overexpressed in the pHu + line. Conversely, the majority of genes differentially expressed from E18 were overexpressed in the pHu- line. During the metabolic shift at E18, there was a decrease in the expression of genes linked to several metabolic functions (e.g. protein synthesis, autophagy and mitochondrial activity). At hatching (D0), there were two distinct groups of pHu + chicks based on hierarchical clustering; these groups also differed in liver weight and serum parameters (e.g. triglyceride content and creatine kinase activity). At D0 and D8, there was a sex effect for several metabolic pathways. Metabolism appeared to be more active and oriented towards protein synthesis (RPS6) and fatty acid beta-oxidation (ACAA2, ACOX1) in males than in females. In comparison, the genes overexpressed in females were related to carbohydrate metabolism (SLC2A1, SLC2A12, FoxO1, PHKA2, PHKB, PRKAB2 and GYS2). Conclusions Our study provides the first detailed description of the evolution of different hepatic metabolic pathways during the early development of embryos and post-hatching chicks. We found a metabolic orientation for the pHu + line towards proteolysis, glycogen degradation, ATP synthesis and autophagy, likely in response to a higher energy requirement compared with pHu- embryos. The metabolic orientations specific to the pHu + and pHu- lines are established very early, probably in relation with their different genetic background and available nutrients.
Background Organellar transcriptomes are relatively under-studied systems, with data related to full-length transcripts and posttranscriptional modifications remaining sparse. Direct RNA sequencing presents the possibility of accessing a previously unavailable layer of information pertaining to transcriptomic data, as well as circumventing the biases introduced by second-generation RNA-seq platforms. Direct long-read ONT sequencing allows for the isoform analysis of full-length transcripts and the detection of posttranscriptional modifications. However, there are still relatively few projects employing this method specifically for studying organellar transcriptomes. Results Candida albicans is a promising model for investigating nucleo-mitochondrial interactions. This work comprises ONT sequencing of the Candida albicans mitochondrial transcriptome along with the development of a dedicated data analysis pipeline. This approach allowed for the detection of complete transcript isoforms and posttranslational RNA modifications, as well as an analysis of C. albicans deletion mutants in genes coding for the 5' and 3' mitochondrial RNA exonucleases CaPET127 and CaDSS1. It also enabled for corrections to previous studies in terms of 3' and 5' transcript ends. A number of intermediate splicing isoforms was also discovered, along with mature and unspliced transcripts and changes in their abundances resulting from disruption of both 5' and 3' exonucleolytic processing. Multiple putative posttranscriptional modification sites have also been detected. Conclusions This preliminary work demonstrates the suitability of direct RNA sequencing for studying yeast mitochondrial transcriptomes in general and provides new insights into the workings of the C. albicans mitochondrial transcriptome in particular. It also provides a general roadmap for analyzing mitochondrial transcriptomic data from other organisms.
BackgroundUnraveling the intricate and tightly regulated process of adipogenesis, involving coordinated activation of transcription factors and signaling pathways, is essential for addressing obesity and related metabolic disorders. The molecular pathways recruited by mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) during adipogenesis are also dependent on the different sources of the cells and genetic backgrounds of donors, which contribute to the functional heterogeneity of the stem cells and consequently affect the developmental features and fate of the cells.MethodsIn this study, the alteration of transcripts during differentiation of synovial mesenchymal stem cells (SMSCs) derived from fibrous synovium (FS) and adipose synovial tissue (FP) of two pig breeds differing in growth performance (German Landrace (DL)) and fat deposition (Angeln Saddleback (AS)) was investigated. SMSCs from both tissues and breeds were stimulated to differentiate into adipocytes in vitro and sampled at four time points (day 1, day 4, day 7 and day 14) to obtain transcriptomic data.ResultsWe observed numerous signaling pathways related to the cell cycle, cell division, cell migration, or cell proliferation during early stages of adipogenesis. As the differentiation process progresses, cells begin to accumulate intracellular lipid droplets and changes in gene expression patterns in particular of adipocyte-specific markers occur. PI3K-Akt signaling and metabolic pathways changed most during adipogenesis, while p53 signaling and ferroptosis were affected late in adipogenesis. When comparing MSCs from FS and FP, only a limited number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and enriched signaling pathways were identified. Metabolic pathways, including fat, energy or amino acid metabolism, were highly enriched in the AS breed SMSCs compared to those of the DL breed, especially at day 7 of adipogenesis, suggesting retention of the characteristic metabolic features of their original source, demonstrating donor memory in culture. In contrast, the DL SMSCs were more enriched in immune signaling pathways.ConclusionsOur study has provided important insights into the dynamics of adipogenesis and revealed metabolic shifts in SMSCs associated with different cell sources and genetic backgrounds of donors. This emphasises the critical role of metabolic and genetic factors as important indications and criteria for donor stem cell selection.
Background Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease affecting over 300,000 people worldwide. It is characterized by the progressive decline of the nervous system that leads to the weakening of muscles which impacts physical function. Approximately, 15% of individuals diagnosed with ALS have a known genetic variant that contributes to their disease. As therapies that slow or prevent symptoms continue to develop, such as antisense oligonucleotides, it is important to discover novel genes that could be targets for treatment. Additionally, as cohorts continue to grow, performing analyses in ALS subtypes, such as primary lateral sclerosis (PLS), becomes possible due to an increase in power. These analyses could highlight novel pathways in disease manifestation. Methods Building on our previous discoveries using rare variant association analyses, we conducted rare variant burden testing on a substantially larger multi-ethnic cohort of 6,970 ALS patients, 166 PLS patients, and 22,524 controls. We used intolerant domain percentiles based on sub-region Residual Variation Intolerance Score (subRVIS) that have been described previously in conjunction with gene based collapsing approaches to conduct burden testing to identify genes that associate with ALS and PLS. Results A gene based collapsing model showed significant associations with SOD1, TARDBP, and TBK1 (OR = 19.18, p = 3.67 x 10(-39); OR = 4.73, p = 2 x 10(-10); OR = 2.3, p = 7.49 x 10(-9), respectively). These genes have been previously associated with ALS. Additionally, a significant novel control enriched gene, ALKBH3 (p = 4.88 x 10(-7)), was protective for ALS in this model. An intolerant domain-based collapsing model showed a significant improvement in identifying regions in TARDBP that associated with ALS (OR = 10.08, p = 3.62 x 10(-16)). Our PLS protein truncating variant collapsing analysis demonstrated significant case enrichment in ANTXR2 (p = 8.38 x 10(-6)). Conclusions In a large multi-ethnic cohort of 6,970 ALS patients, collapsing analyses validated known ALS genes and identified a novel potentially protective gene, ALKBH3. A first-ever analysis in 166 patients with PLS found a candidate association with loss-of-function mutations in ANTXR2.
IntroductionPseudogenes have been implicated for their role in regulating cellular differentiation and organismal development. However, their role in promoting cancer-associated differentiation has not been well-studied. This study explores the tumour landscape of oesophageal carcinoma to identify pseudogenes that may regulate events of differentiation to promote oncogenic transformation.Materials and methodDe-regulated differentiation-associated pseudogenes were identified using DeSeq2 followed by 'InteractiVenn' analysis to identify their expression pattern. Gene expression dependent and independent enrichment analyses were performed with GSEA and ShinyGO, respectively, followed by quantification of cellular reprogramming, extent of differentiation and pleiotropy using three unique metrics. Stage-specific gene regulatory networks using Bayesian Network Splitting Average were generated, followed by network topology analysis. MEME, STREME and Tomtom were employed to identify transcription factors and miRNAs that play a regulatory role downstream of pseudogenes to initiate cellular reprogramming and further promote oncogenic transformation. The patient samples were stratified based on the expression pattern of pseudogenes, followed by GSEA, mutation analysis and survival analysis using GSEA, MAF and 'survminer', respectively.ResultsPseudogenes display a unique stage-wise expression pattern that characterizes stage II (SII) ESCA with a high rate of cellular reprogramming, degree of differentiation and pleiotropy. Gene regulatory network and associated topology indicate high robustness, thus validating high pleiotropy observed for SII. Pseudogene-regulated expression of SOX2, FEV, PRRX1 and TFAP2A in SII may modulate cellular reprogramming and promote oncogenesis. Additionally, patient stratification-based mutational analysis in SII signifies APOBEC3A (A3A) as a potential hallmark of homeostatic mutational events of reprogrammed cells which in addition to de-regulated APOBEC3G leads to distinct events of hypermutations. Further enrichment analysis for both cohorts revealed the critical role of combinatorial expression of pseudogenes in cellular reprogramming. Finally, survival analysis reveals distinct genes that promote poor prognosis in SII ESCA and patient-stratified cohorts, thus providing valuable prognostic bio-markers along with markers of differentiation and oncogenesis for distinct landscapes of pseudogene expression.ConclusionPseudogenes associated with the events of differentiation potentially aid in the initiation of cellular reprogramming to facilitate oncogenic transformation, especially during SII ESCA. Despite a better overall survival of SII, patient stratification reveals combinatorial de-regulation of pseudogenes as a notable marker for a high degree of cellular differentiation with a unique mutational landscape.
Background The sexual maturity of chickens is an important economic trait, and the breeding of precocious and delayed puberty roosters is an important selection strategy for broilers. The comb serves as an important secondary sexual characteristic of roosters and determines their sexual precocity. Moreover, comb development is closely associated with gonad development in roosters. However, the underlying molecular mechanism regulating the sexual maturity of roosters has not yet been fully explored.Results In order to identify the genes related to precocious puberty in Qingyuan partridge roosters, and based on the synchrony of testis and combs development, combined with histological observation and RNA-seq method, the developmental status and gene expression profile of combs and testis were obtained. The results showed that during the early growth and development period (77 days of age), the development of combs and testis was significant in the high comb (H) group versus the low comb (L) group (p < 0.05); however, the morphological characteristic of the comb and testicular tissues converged during the late growth and development period (112 days of age) in the H and L groups. Based on these results, RNA-sequencing analysis was performed on the comb and testis tissues of the 77 and 112 days old Qingyuan Partridge roosters with different comb height traits. GO and KEGG analysis enrichment analysis showed that the differentially expressed genes were primarily enriched in MAPK signaling, VEGF signaling, and retinol metabolism pathways. Moreover, weighted correlation network analysis and module co-expression network analysis identified WNT6, AMH, IHH, STT3A, PEX16, KPNA7, CATHL2, ROR2, PAMR1, WISP2, IL17REL, NDRG4, CYP26B1, and CRHBP as the key genes associated with the regulation of precocity and delayed puberty in Qingyuan Partridge roosters.Conclusions In summary, we identified the key regulatory genes of sexual precocity in roosters, which provide a theoretical basis for understanding the developmental differences between precocious and delayed puberty in roosters.
Background Salt sensitivity of blood pressure (SSBP) is an intermediate phenotype of hypertension and is a predictor of long-term cardiovascular events and death. However, the genetic structures of SSBP are uncertain, and it is difficult to precisely diagnose SSBP in population. So, we aimed to identify genes related to susceptibility to the SSBP, construct a risk evaluation model, and explore the potential functions of these genes. Methods and results A genome-wide association study of the systemic epidemiology of salt sensitivity (EpiSS) cohort was performed to obtain summary statistics for SSBP. Then, we conducted a transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) of 12 tissues using FUSION software to predict the genes associated with SSBP and verified the genes with an mRNA microarray. The potential roles of the genes were explored. Risk evaluation models of SSBP were constructed based on the serial P value thresholds of polygenetic risk scores (PRSs), polygenic transcriptome risk scores (PTRSs) and their combinations of the identified genes and genetic variants from the TWAS. The TWAS revealed that 2605 genes were significantly associated with SSBP. Among these genes, 69 were differentially expressed according to the microarray analysis. The functional analysis showed that the genes identified in the TWAS were enriched in metabolic process pathways. The PRSs were correlated with PTRSs in the heart atrial appendage, adrenal gland, EBV-transformed lymphocytes, pituitary, artery coronary, artery tibial and whole blood. Multiple logistic regression models revealed that a PRS of P < 0.05 had the best predictive ability compared with other PRSs and PTRSs. The combinations of PRSs and PTRSs did not significantly increase the prediction accuracy of SSBP in the training and validation datasets. Conclusions Several known and novel susceptibility genes for SSBP were identified via multitissue TWAS analysis. The risk evaluation model constructed with the PRS of susceptibility genes showed better diagnostic performance than the transcript levels, which could be applied to screen for SSBP high-risk individuals.
Listeria monocytogenes is an important foodborne pathogen known for causing listeriosis. To gain insights into the pathogenicity, genetic characterization, and evolution of various Listeria species, in vitro cell adhesion and invasion ability assays and whole-genome sequencing were performed using four Listeria strains isolated from livestock and poultry slaughterhouses. The four Listeria strains exhibited adhesion and invasion abilities in Caco-2 and RAW264.7 cells. Pathogenic Liv1-1 and Lm2-20 had higher adhesion ability, but non-pathogenic Lin4-99 was more invasive than Lm2-20 (p < 0.05). Genetic characterization revealed the presence of a single chromosome without plasmid across four strains with similar whole-genome sizes and G + C% content. Analysis of key pathogenic genes underscored the presence of multiple virulence genes among the four Listeria strains. In contrast, non-pathogenic Listeria lacked LIPI-1, LIPI-2, and LIPI-3 genes, which could possibly be the cause of their non-pathogenicity despite their in vitro cell adhesion and invasion abilities. Thus, genetic determinants of Listeria do not necessarily predict cell adhesion and/or invasive ability in vitro. This study presents a comprehensive comparative genome-wide analysis of four Listeria strains, offering invaluable insights into the pathogenesis of the Listeria genus.
The corpora allata-corpora cardiaca (CA-CC) is an endocrine gland complex that regulates mosquito development and reproduction through the synthesis of juvenile hormone (JH). Epoxidase (Epox) is a key enzyme in the production of JH. We recently utilized CRISPR/Cas9 to establish an epoxidase-deficient (epox(-/-)) Aedes aegypti line. The CA from epox(-/-) mutants do not synthesize epoxidated JH III but methyl farneosate (MF), a weak agonist of the JH receptor, and therefore have reduced JH signalling. Illumina sequencing was used to examine the differences in gene expression between the CA-CC from wild type (WT) and epox(-/-) adult female mosquitoes. From 18,034 identified genes, 317 were significantly differentially expressed. These genes are involved in many biological processes, including the regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis, energy metabolism, and nutritional uptake. In addition, the same CA-CC samples were also used to examine the microRNA (miRNA) profiles of epox(-/- )and WT mosquitoes. A total of 197 miRNAs were detected, 24 of which were differentially regulated in epox(-/-) mutants. miRNA binding sites for these particular miRNAs were identified using an in silico approach; they target a total of 101 differentially expressed genes. Our results suggest that a lack of epoxidase, besides affecting JH synthesis, results in the diminishing of JH signalling that have significant effects on Ae. aegypti CA-CC transcriptome profiles, as well as its miRNA repertoire.
Background Tuberculosis (TB) represents a major global health challenge. Drug resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) poses a substantial obstacle to effective TB treatment. Identifying genomic mutations in MTB isolates holds promise for unraveling the underlying mechanisms of drug resistance in this bacterium. Methods In this study, we investigated the roles of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in MTB isolates resistant to four antibiotics (moxifloxacin, ofloxacin, amikacin, and capreomycin) through whole-genome analysis. We identified the drug-resistance-associated SNVs by comparing the genomes of MTB isolates with reference genomes using the MuMmer4 tool. Results We observed a strikingly high proportion (94.2%) of MTB isolates resistant to ofloxacin, underscoring the current prevalence of drug resistance in MTB. An average of 3529 SNVs were detected in a single ofloxacin-resistant isolate, indicating a mutation rate of approximately 0.08% under the selective pressure of ofloxacin exposure. We identified a set of 60 SNVs associated with extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB), among which 42 SNVs were non-synonymous mutations located in the coding regions of nine key genes (ctpI, desA3, mce1R, moeB1, ndhA, PE_PGRS4, PPE18, rpsA, secF). Protein structure modeling revealed that SNVs of three genes (PE_PGRS4, desA3, secF) are close to the critical catalytic active sites in the three-dimensional structure of the coding proteins. Conclusion This comprehensive study elucidates novel resistance mechanisms in MTB against antibiotics, paving the way for future design and development of anti-tuberculosis drugs.
BackgroundBacterial small regulatory RNA (sRNA) plays a crucial role in cell metabolism and could be used as a new potential drug target in the treatment of pathogen-induced disease. However, experimental methods for identifying sRNAs still require a large investment of human and material resources.MethodsIn this study, we propose a novel sRNA prediction model called sRNAdeep based on the DistilBERT feature extraction and TextCNN methods. The sRNA and non-sRNA sequences of bacteria were considered as sentences and then fed into a composite model consisting of deep learning models to evaluate classification performance.ResultsBy filtering sRNAs from BSRD database, we obtained a validation dataset comprised of 2438 positive and 4730 negative samples. The benchmark experiments showed that sRNAdeep displayed better performance in the various indexes compared to previous sRNA prediction tools. By applying our tool to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) genome, we have identified 21 sRNAs within the intergenic and intron regions. A set of 272 targeted genes regulated by these sRNAs were also captured in MTB. The coding proteins of two genes (lysX and icd1) are implicated in drug response, with significant active sites related to drug resistance mechanisms of MTB.ConclusionIn conclusion, our newly developed sRNAdeep can help researchers identify bacterial sRNAs more precisely and can be freely available from https://github.com/pyajagod/sRNAdeep.git.
Background Temperature is an important environment factor that is critical to the survival and growth of crustaceans. However, the mechanisms by which crustaceans detect changes in temperature are still unclear. The transient receptor potential (TRP) channels are non-selective cation channels well known for properties in temperature sensation. However, comprehensive understandings on TRP channels as well as their temperature sensing functions are still lacking in crustaceans.Results In this study, a total of 26 TRP genes were identified in the swimming crab, Portunus trituberculatus, which can be classified into TRPA, TRPC, TRPP, TRPM, TRPML, TRPN and TRPV. Tissue expression analysis revealed a wide distribution of these TRP genes in P. trituberculatus, and antennules, neural tissues, and ovaries were the most commonly expressed tissues. To investigate the responsiveness of TRP genes to the temperature change, 18 TRPs were selected to detect their expression after high and low temperature stress. The results showed that 12 TRPs showed induced gene expression in both high and low temperature groups, while 3 were down-regulated in the low temperature group, and 3 showed no change in expression in either group.Conclusions This study characterized the TRP family genes in P. trituberculatus, and explored their involvement in response to temperature stress. Our results will enhance overall understanding of crustacean TRP channels and their possible functions.
Halomonas species are renowned for their production of organic compatible solutes, particularly ectoine. However, the identification of key regulatory genes governing ectoine production in Halomonas remains limited. In this study, we conducted a combined transcriptome-proteome analysis to unveil additional regulatory genes influencing ectoine biosynthesis, particularly under ultraviolet (UV) and salt conditions. NaCl induction resulted in a 20-fold increase, while UV treatment led to at least 2.5-fold increases in ectoine production. The number of overlapping genes between transcriptomic and proteomic analyses for three comparisons, i.e., non-UV with NaCl (UV0-NaCl) vs. non-UV without NaCl (UV0), UV strain 1 (UV1-NaCl) vs. UV0-NaCl, and UV strain 2 (UV2-NaCl) vs. UV0-NaCl were 137, 19, and 21, respectively. The overlapped Gene Ontology (GO) enrichments between transcriptomic and proteomic analyses include ATPase-coupled organic phosphonate, phosphonate transmembrane transporter activity, and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transport complex in different comparisons. Furthermore, five common genes exhibited different expression patterns at mRNA and protein levels across the three comparisons. These genes included orf01280, orf00986, orf01283, orf01282 and orf01284. qPCR verification confirmed that three of the five common genes were notably under-expressed following NaCl and UV treatments. This study highlighted the potential role of these five common genes in regulating ectoine production in Halomonas strains.
The tissue damage caused by transient ischemic injury is an essential component of the pathogenesis of retinal ischemia, which mainly hinges on the degree and duration of interruption of the blood supply and the subsequent damage caused by tissue reperfusion. Some research indicated that the retinal injury induced by ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) was related to reperfusion time.In this study, we screened the differentially expressed circRNAs, lncRNAs, and mRNAs between the control and model group and at different reperfusion time (24h, 72h, and 7d) with the aid of whole transcriptome sequencing technology, and the trend changes in time-varying mRNA, lncRNA, circRNA were obtained by chronological analysis. Then, candidate circRNAs, lncRNAs, and mRNAs were obtained as the intersection of differentially expression genes and trend change genes. Importance scores of the genes selected the key genes whose expression changed with the increase of reperfusion time. Also, the characteristic differentially expressed genes specific to the reperfusion time were analyzed, key genes specific to reperfusion time were selected to show the change in biological process with the increase of reperfusion time.As a result, 316 candidate mRNAs, 137 candidate lncRNAs, and 31 candidate circRNAs were obtained by the intersection of differentially expressed mRNAs, lncRNAs, and circRNAs with trend mRNAs, trend lncRNAs and trend circRNAs, 5 key genes (Cd74, RT1-Da, RT1-CE5, RT1-Bb, RT1-DOa) were selected by importance scores of the genes. The result of GSEA showed that key genes were found to play vital roles in antigen processing and presentation, regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, and the ribosome. A network included 4 key genes (Cd74, RT1-Da, RT1-Bb, RT1-DOa), 34 miRNAs and 48 lncRNAs, and 81 regulatory relationship axes, and a network included 4 key genes (Cd74, RT1-Da, RT1-Bb, RT1-DOa), 9 miRNAs and 3 circRNAs (circRNA_10572, circRNA_03219, circRNA_11359) and 12 regulatory relationship axes were constructed, the subcellular location, transcription factors, signaling network, targeted drugs and relationship to eye diseases of key genes were predicted. 1370 characteristic differentially expressed mRNAs (spec_24h mRNA), 558 characteristic differentially expressed mRNAs (spec_72h mRNA), and 92 characteristic differentially expressed mRNAs (spec_7d mRNA) were found, and their key genes and regulation networks were analyzed.In summary, we screened the differentially expressed circRNAs, lncRNAs, and mRNAs between the control and model groups and at different reperfusion time (24h, 72h, and 7d). 5 key genes, Cd74, RT1-Da, RT1-CE5, RT1-Bb, RT1-DOa, were selected. Key genes specific to reperfusion time were selected to show the change in biological process with the increased reperfusion time. These results provided theoretical support and a reference basis for the clinical treatment.
BackgroundNuptial pads, a typical sexually dimorphic trait in anurans, are located on the first digit of the male forelimb in Rana chensinensis and exhibit morphological changes synchronized with breeding cycles. However, the genetic mechanisms underlying its formation and seasonal changes remain poorly understood.ResultsTo identify genes and biological processes associated with the development and seasonal variations of nuptial pads, we conducted a comprehensive transcriptome analysis on nuptial pads and hind toe skin across both sexes at different breeding periods in R. chensinensis. We identified numerous sexually and seasonally differential expression genes in nuptial pads. Notably, genes including KRT, TRY, HPDB, AKR1C1, and AKR1C3 were identified as potential key regulators of keratinization and coloration variation in nuptial pads. We further examined gene co-expression modules closely linked to nuptial pad development. These modules contained genes involved in signal transduction, substance transport, cytoskeletal structure, energy metabolism, and protein modification, suggesting that the development of nuptial pads is a complex multifaceted regulatory process. Furthermore, genes in modules associated with pad development during the breeding season were primarily involved in apoptosis, steroid hormone synthesis, autophagy, and cytochrome P450 pathways, suggesting their pivotal role in pad formation. Additionally, key regulators of the cell cycle, such as FOXO4, PIK3C2A, and GSPT2, were implicated in influencing nuptial pad development by modulating cell differentiation and proliferation.ConclusionsOur study provides a valuable reference for investigating the molecular basis of sexual dimorphism in R. chensinensis and other amphibian species more broadly.
BackgroundDrought stress restricts the growth, distribution and productivity of alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.). In order to study the response differences of alfalfa cultivars to drought stress, we previously carried out physiological and molecular comparative analysis on two alfalfa varieties with contrasting drought resistance (relatively drought-tolerant Longdong and drought-sensitive Algonquin). However, the differences in proteomic factors of the two varieties in response to drought stress still need to be further studied. Therefore, TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using leaf tissues of the two alfalfa cultivars to identify and uncover differentially abundant proteins (DAPs).ResultsIn total, 677 DAPs were identified in Algonquin and 277 in Longdong under drought stress. Subsequently, we conducted various bioinformatics analysis on these DAPs, including subcellular location, functional classification and biological pathway enrichment. The first two main COG functional categories of DAPs in both alfalfa varieties after drought stress were 'Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis' and 'Posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones'. According to KEGG database, the DAPs of the two alfalfa cultivars after drought treatment were differentially enriched in different biological pathways. The DAPs from Algonquin were enriched in 'photosynthesis' and 'ribosome'. The pathways of 'linoleic acid metabolism', 'protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum' and 'RNA transport' in Longdong were significantly enriched. Finally, we found significant differences in DAP enrichment and expression patterns between Longdong and Algonquin in glycolysis/glycogenesis, TCA cycle, photosynthesis, protein biosynthesis, flavonoid and isoflavonoid biosynthesis, and plant-pathogen interaction pathway after drought treatment.ConclusionsThe differences of DAPs involved in various metabolic pathways may explain the differences in the resistance of the two varieties to drought stress. These DAPs can be used as candidate proteins for molecular breeding of alfalfa to cultivate new germplasm with more drought tolerance to adapt to unfavorable environments.
Background Herein, we report results from a genome-wide study conducted to identify protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) for circulating angiogenic and inflammatory protein markers in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). The study was conducted using genotype, protein marker, and baseline clinical and demographic data from CALGB/SWOG 80405 (Alliance), a randomized phase III study designed to assess outcomes of adding VEGF or EGFR inhibitors to systemic chemotherapy in mCRC patients. Germline DNA derived from blood was genotyped on whole-genome array platforms. The abundance of protein markers was quantified using a multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay from plasma derived from peripheral venous blood collected at baseline. A robust rank-based method was used to assess the statistical significance of each variant and protein pair against a strict genome-wide level. A given pQTL was tested for validation in two external datasets of prostate (CALGB 90401) and pancreatic cancer (CALGB 80303) patients. Bioinformatics analyses were conducted to further establish biological bases for these findings. Results The final analysis was carried out based on data from 540,021 common typed genetic variants and 23 protein markers from 869 genetically estimated European patients with mCRC. Correcting for multiple testing, the analysis discovered a novel cis-pQTL in LINC02869, a long non-coding RNA gene, for circulating TGF-beta 2 levels (rs11118119; AAF = 0.11; P-value < 1.4e-14). This finding was validated in a cohort of 538 prostate cancer patients from CALGB 90401 (AAF = 0.10, P-value < 3.3e-25). The analysis also validated a cis-pQTL we had previously reported for VEGF-A in advanced pancreatic cancer, and additionally identified trans-pQTLs for VEGF-R3, and cis-pQTLs for CD73. Conclusions This study has provided evidence of a novel cis germline genetic variant that regulates circulating TGF-beta 2 levels in plasma of patients with advanced mCRC and prostate cancer. Moreover, the validation of previously identified pQTLs for VEGF-A, CD73, and VEGF-R3, potentiates the validity of these associations.
BackgroundParameters adversely affecting the contiguity and accuracy of the assemblies from Illumina next-generation sequencing (NGS) are well described. However, past studies generally focused on their additive effects, overlooking their potential interactions possibly exacerbating one another's effects in a multiplicative manner. To investigate whether or not they act interactively on de novo genome assembly quality, we simulated sequencing data for 13 bacterial reference genomes, with varying levels of error rate, sequencing depth, PCR and optical duplicate ratios.ResultsWe assessed the quality of assemblies from the simulated sequencing data with a number of contiguity and accuracy metrics, which we used to quantify both additive and multiplicative effects of the four parameters. We found that the tested parameters are engaged in complex interactions, exerting multiplicative, rather than additive, effects on assembly quality. Also, the ratio of non-repeated regions and GC% of the original genomes can shape how the four parameters affect assembly quality.ConclusionsWe provide a framework for consideration in future studies using de novo genome assembly of bacterial genomes, e.g. in choosing the optimal sequencing depth, balancing between its positive effect on contiguity and negative effect on accuracy due to its interaction with error rate. Furthermore, the properties of the genomes to be sequenced also should be taken into account, as they might influence the effects of error sources themselves.
Background The marine environment boasts distinctive physical, chemical, and biological characteristics. While numerous studies have delved into the microbial ecology and biological potential of the marine environment, exploration of genetically encoded, deep-sea sourced secondary metabolites remains scarce. This study endeavors to investigate marine bioproducts derived from deep-sea water samples at a depth of 1,000 m in the Java Trench, Indonesia, utilizing both culture-dependent and whole-genome sequencing methods. Results Our efforts led to the successful isolation and cultivation of a bacterium Priestia flexa JT4 from the water samples, followed by comprehensive genome sequencing. The resultant high-quality draft genome, approximately 4 Mb, harbored 5185 coding sequences (CDSs). Notably, 61.97% of these CDSs were inadequately characterized, presenting potential novel CDSs. This study is the first to identify the "open-type" (alpha < 1) pangenome within the genus Priestia. Moreover, our analysis uncovered eight biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) using the common genome mining pipeline, antiSMASH. Two non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) BGCs within these clusters exhibited the potential to generate novel biological compounds. Noteworthy is the confirmation that the terpene BGC in P. flexa JT4 can produce lycopene, a compound in substantial industrial demand. The presence of lycopene in the P. flexa JT4 cells was verified using Ultra-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) in multiple reaction modes. Conclusions This study highlights the bioprospecting opportunity to explore novel bioproducts and lycopene compounds from P. flexa JT4. It marks the pioneering exploration of deep-sea bacterium bioprospecting in Indonesia, seeking to unveil novel bioproducts and lycopene compounds through a genome mining approach.
BackgroundSarcoptic mange is an emerging and neglected contagious skin disease caused by the mite Sarcoptes scabiei, affecting humans, domestic animals, and wildlife. Mange is the main disease and a major concern for the management and conservation of populations of Iberian ibex (Capra pyrenaica), a medium-sized mountain ungulate endemic to the Iberian Peninsula and Northern Pyrenees. Differences in host-parasite interaction and host immune response determine mange clinical outcome, but little is known about the related differences in gene expression. This study determined blood and skin gene expressions in S. scabiei-experimentally infested Iberian ibexes.ResultsInfestation with S. scabiei promoted immune and inflammatory genomic responses both in skin and blood, with two different clinical outcomes: either severe infestation or recovery. Sarcoptes scabiei induced local skin immunosuppression to favour its multiplication and establishment of the infestation in the host. Skin gene expression was mostly inflammatory and inefficient to control mange in the severely infected ibexes. Conversely, the immune skin response of the recovered ibexes effectively recognised S. scabiei and activated T-cells, limiting the infestation. Consequently, inflammation-related genes were more expressed in the blood of the severely infested ibexes than in those that recovered.ConclusionsThe results demonstrate that skin local cellular immune response is key to control sarcoptic mange and prevent the systemic spread of the disease and the associated inflammatory response. These results will be useful to understand the pathogenesis and drivers of the differential outcome of mange at individual scale, and the population and ecological consequences of such variability in Iberian ibex, as well as in other wildlife species, domestic animals, and humans.
The Ets domain transcription factors direct diverse biological processes throughout all metazoans and are implicated in development as well as in tumor initiation, progression and metastasis. The Drosophila Ets transcription factor Pointed (Pnt) is the downstream effector of the Epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr) pathway and is required for cell cycle progression, specification, and differentiation of most cell types in the larval eye disc. Despite its critical role in development, very few targets of Pnt have been reported previously. Here, we employed an integrated approach by combining genome-wide single cell and bulk data to identify putative cell type-specific Pnt targets. First, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) to determine the genome-wide occupancy of Pnt in late larval eye discs. We identified enriched regions that mapped to an average of 6,941 genes, the vast majority of which are novel putative Pnt targets. Next, we integrated ChIP-seq data with two other larval eye single cell genomics datasets (scRNA-seq and snATAC-seq) to reveal 157 putative cell type-specific Pnt targets that may help mediate unique cell type responses upon Egfr-induced differentiation. Finally, our integrated data also predicts cell type-specific functional enhancers that were not reported previously. Together, our study provides a greatly expanded list of putative cell type-specific Pnt targets in the eye and is a resource for future studies that will allow mechanistic insights into complex developmental processes regulated by Egfr signaling.
The Drosophila eye has been an important model to understand principles of differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis and tissue morphogenesis. However, a single cell RNA sequence resource that captures gene expression dynamics from the initiation of differentiation to the specification of different cell types in the larval eye disc is lacking. Here, we report transcriptomic data from 13,000 cells that cover six developmental stages of the larval eye. Our data show cell clusters that correspond to all major cell types present in the eye disc ranging from the initiation of the morphogenetic furrow to the differentiation of each photoreceptor cell type as well as early cone cells. We identify dozens of cell type-specific genes whose function in different aspects of eye development have not been reported. These single cell data will greatly aid research groups studying different aspects of early eye development and will facilitate a deeper understanding of the larval eye as a model system.
Background Understanding growth regulatory pathways is important in aquaculture, fisheries, and vertebrate physiology generally. Machine learning pattern recognition and sensitivity analysis were employed to examine metabolomic small molecule profiles and transcriptomic gene expression data generated from liver and white skeletal muscle of hybrid striped bass (white bass Morone chrysops x striped bass M. saxatilis) representative of the top and bottom 10 % by body size of a production cohort. Results Larger fish (good-growth) had significantly greater weight, total length, hepatosomatic index, and specific growth rate compared to smaller fish (poor-growth) and also had significantly more muscle fibers of smaller diameter (<= 20 mu m diameter), indicating active hyperplasia. Differences in metabolomic pathways included enhanced energetics (glycolysis, citric acid cycle) and amino acid metabolism in good-growth fish, and enhanced stress, muscle inflammation (cortisol, eicosanoids) and dysfunctional liver cholesterol metabolism in poor-growth fish. The majority of gene transcripts identified as differentially expressed between groups were down-regulated in good-growth fish. Several molecules associated with important growth-regulatory pathways were up-regulated in muscle of fish that grew poorly: growth factors including agt and agtr2 (angiotensins), nicotinic acid (which stimulates growth hormone production), gadd45b, rgl1, zfp36, cebpb, and hmgb1; insulin-like growth factor signaling (igfbp1 and igf1); cytokine signaling (socs3, cxcr4); cell signaling (rgs13, rundc3a), and differentiation (rhou, mmp17, cd22, msi1); mitochondrial uncoupling proteins (ucp3, ucp2); and regulators of lipid metabolism (apoa1, ldlr). Growth factors pttg1, egfr, myc, notch1, and sirt1 were notably up-regulated in muscle of good-growing fish. Conclusion A combinatorial pathway analysis using metabolomic and transcriptomic data collectively suggested promotion of cell signaling, proliferation, and differentiation in muscle of good-growth fish, whereas muscle inflammation and apoptosis was observed in poor-growth fish, along with elevated cortisol (an anti-inflammatory hormone), perhaps related to muscle wasting, hypertrophy, and inferior growth. These findings provide important biomarkers and mechanisms by which growth is regulated in fishes and other vertebrates as well.
Background Sect. Tuberculata belongs to Camellia, and its members are characterized by a wrinkled pericarp and united filaments. All the plants in this group, which are endemic to China, are highly valuable for exploring the evolution of Camellia and have great potential for use as an oil source. However, due to the complex and diverse phenotypes of these species and the difficulty of investigating them in the field, their complex evolutionary history and interspecific definitions have remained largely unelucidated. Results Therefore, we newly sequenced and annotated 12 chloroplast (cp) genomes and retrieved the published cp genome of Camellia anlungensis Chang in sect. Tuberculata. In this study, comparative analysis of the cp genomes of the thirteen sect. Tuberculata species revealed a typical quadripartite structure characterized by a total sequence length ranging from 156,587 bp to 157,068 bp. The cp.genome arrangement is highly conserved and moderately differentiated. A total of 130 to 136 genes specific to the three types were identified by annotation, including protein-coding genes (coding sequences (CDSs)) (87-91), tRNA genes (35-37), and rRNA genes (8). The total observed frequency ranged from 23,045 (C. lipingensis) to 26,557 (C. anlungensis). IR region boundaries were analyzed to show that the ycf1 gene of C. anlungensis is located in the IRb region, while the remaining species are present only in the IRa region. Sequence variation in the SSC region is greater than that in the IR region, and most protein-coding genes have high codon preferences. Comparative analyses revealed six hotspot regions (tRNA-Thr(GGT)-psbD, psbE-petL, ycf15-tRNA-Leu(CAA), ndhF-rpl32, ndhD, and trnL(CAA)-ycf15) in the cp genomes that could serve as potential molecular markers. In addition, the results of phylogenetic tree construction based on the cp genomes showed that the thirteen sect. Tuberculata species formed a monophyletic group and were divided into two evolutionarily independent clades, confirming the independence of the section. Conclusions In summary, we obtained the cp genomes of thirteen sect. Tuberculata plants and performed the first comparative analysis of this group. These results will help us better characterize the plants in this section, deepen our understanding of their genetic characteristics and phylogenetic relationships, and lay the theoretical foundation for their accurate classification, elucidation of their evolutionary changes, and rational development and utilization of this section in the future.
BackgroundMany common diseases exhibit uncontrolled mTOR signaling, prompting considerable interest in the therapeutic potential of mTOR inhibitors, such as rapamycin, to treat a range of conditions, including cancer, aging-related pathologies, and neurological disorders. Despite encouraging preclinical results, the success of mTOR interventions in the clinic has been limited by off-target side effects and dose-limiting toxicities. Improving clinical efficacy and mitigating side effects require a better understanding of the influence of key clinical factors, such as sex, tissue, and genomic background, on the outcomes of mTOR-targeting therapies.ResultsWe assayed gene expression with and without rapamycin exposure across three distinct body parts (head, thorax, abdomen) of D. melanogaster flies, bearing either their native melanogaster mitochondrial genome or the mitochondrial genome from a related species, D. simulans. The fully factorial RNA-seq study design revealed a large number of genes that responded to the rapamycin treatment in a sex-dependent and tissue-dependent manner, and relatively few genes with the transcriptional response to rapamycin affected by the mitochondrial background. Reanalysis of an earlier study confirmed that mitochondria can have a temporal influence on rapamycin response.ConclusionsWe found significant and wide-ranging effects of sex and body part, alongside a subtle, potentially time-dependent, influence of mitochondria on the transcriptional response to rapamycin. Our findings suggest a number of pathways that could be crucial for predicting potential side effects of mTOR inhibition in a particular sex or tissue. Further studies of the temporal response to rapamycin are necessary to elucidate the effects of the mitochondrial background on mTOR and its inhibition.
Background Organization of the eukaryotic genome is essential for proper function, including gene expression. In metazoans, chromatin loops and Topologically Associated Domains (TADs) organize genes into transcription factories, while chromosomes occupy nuclear territories in which silent heterochromatin is compartmentalized at the nuclear periphery and active euchromatin localizes to the nucleus center. A similar hierarchical organization occurs in the fungus Neurospora crassa where its seven chromosomes form a Rabl conformation typified by heterochromatic centromeres and telomeres independently clustering at the nuclear membrane, while interspersed heterochromatic loci aggregate across Megabases of linear genomic distance to loop chromatin in TAD-like structures. However, the role of individual heterochromatic loci in normal genome organization and function is unknown.
Background The fungus Metarhizium brunneum has evolved a remarkable ability to switch between different lifestyles. It develops as a saprophyte, an endophyte establishing mutualistic relationships with plants, or a parasite, enabling its use for the control of insect pests such as the aphid Myzus persicae. We tested our hypothesis that switches between lifestyles must be accompanied by fundamental transcriptional reprogramming, reflecting adaptations to different environmental settings. Results We combined high throughput RNA sequencing of M. brunneum in vitro and at different stages of pathogenesis to validate the modulation of genes in the fungus and its host during the course of infection. In agreement with our hypothesis, we observed transcriptional reprogramming in M. brunneum following conidial attachment, germination on the cuticle, and early-stage growth within the host. This involved the upregulation of genes encoding degrading enzymes and gene clusters involved in synthesis of secondary metabolites that act as virulence factors. The transcriptional response of the aphid host included the upregulation of genes potentially involved in antifungal activity, but antifungal peptides were not induced. We also observed the induction of a host flightin gene, which may be involved in wing formation and flight muscle development. Conclusions The switch from saprophytic to parasitic development in M. brunneum is accompanied by fundamental transcriptional reprogramming during the course of the infection. The aphid host responds to fungal infection with its own transcriptional reprogramming, reflecting its inability to express antifungal peptides but featuring the induction of genes involved in winged morphs that may enable offspring to avoid the contaminated environment.
BackgroundCastration is a common practice in beef cattle production systems to manage breeding and enhance meat quality by promoting intramuscular fat (IMF) deposition, known as marbling. However, the molecular mechanisms that are influenced by castration in beef cattle are poorly understood. The aim of this study was to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and metabolic pathways that regulate IMF deposition in crossbred cattle by RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) of skeletal muscle tissue. Six hundred and forty F1 Angus-Nellore bulls and steers (n = 320/group) were submitted to feedlot finishing for 180 days. Sixty Longissimus thoracis muscle samples were collected randomly from each group in the hot carcass (at slaughter) and 48 h post-mortem (at deboning), at between 12th and 13th thoracic vertebrae. Three muscle samples of each group were randomly selected for RNA-Seq analysis, while the post-deboning meat samples were submitted to determination of IMF content. ResultsSteers had a 2.7-fold greater IMF content than bulls (5.59 vs. 2.07%; P < 0.01). A total of 921 DEGs (FDR < 0.05) were identified in contrast between Bulls versus Steers; of these, 371 were up-regulated, and 550 were down-regulated. Functional transcriptome enrichment analysis revealed differences in biological processes and metabolic pathways related to adipogenesis and lipogenesis, such as insulin resistance, AMPK, cAMP, regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes, and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways. Candidate genes such as FOXO1, PPARG, PCK2, CALM1, LEP, ADIPOQ, FASN, FABP4, PLIN1, PIK3R3, ROCK2, ADCY5, and ADORA1 were regulated in steers, which explains the expressive difference in IMF content when compared to bulls. ConclusionsThe current findings suggest the importance of these pathways and genes for lipid metabolism in steers with greater IMF. Notably, this study reveals for the first time the involvement of the PI3K-Akt pathway and associated genes in regulating IMF deposition in F1 Angus-Nellore cattle. Castration influenced DEGs linked to energy metabolism and lipid biosynthesis, highlighting key molecular players responsible for IMF accumulation post-castration in beef cattle.
BackgroundTrypanosomatid parasites are a group of protozoans that cause devastating diseases that disproportionately affect developing countries. These protozoans have developed several mechanisms for adaptation to survive in the mammalian host, such as extensive expansion of multigene families enrolled in host-parasite interaction, adaptation to invade and modulate host cells, and the presence of aneuploidy and polyploidy. Two mechanisms might result in "complex" isolates, with more than two haplotypes being present in a single sample: multiplicity of infections (MOI) and polyploidy. We have developed and validated a methodology to identify multiclonal infections and polyploidy using whole genome sequencing reads, based on fluctuations in allelic read depth in heterozygous positions, which can be easily implemented in experiments sequencing genomes from one sample to larger population surveys.ResultsThe methodology estimates the complexity index (CI) of an isolate, and compares real samples with simulated clonal infections at individual and populational level, excluding regions with somy and gene copy number variation. It was primarily validated with simulated MOI and known polyploid isolates respectively from Leishmania and Trypanosoma cruzi. Then, the approach was used to assess the complexity of infection using genome wide SNP data from 497 trypanosomatid samples from four clades, L. donovani/L. infantum, L. braziliensis, T. cruzi and T. brucei providing an overview of multiclonal infection and polyploidy in these cultured parasites. We show that our method robustly detects complex infections in samples with at least 25x coverage, 100 heterozygous SNPs and where 5-10% of the reads correspond to the secondary clone. We find that relatively small proportions (<= 7%) of cultured trypanosomatid isolates are complex.ConclusionsThe method can accurately identify polyploid isolates, and can identify multiclonal infections in scenarios with sufficient genome read coverage. We pack our method in a single R script that requires only a standard variant call format (VCF) file to run (https://github.com/jaumlrc/Complex-Infections). Our analyses indicate that multiclonality and polyploidy do occur in all clades, but not very frequently in cultured trypanosomatids. We caution that our estimates are lower bounds due to the limitations of current laboratory and bioinformatic methods.
Background Despite Spirochetales being a ubiquitous and medically important order of bacteria infecting both humans and animals, there is extremely limited information regarding their bacteriophages. Of the genus Treponema, there is just a single reported characterised prophage. Results We applied a bioinformatic approach on 24 previously published Treponema genomes to identify and characterise putative treponemal prophages. Thirteen of the genomes did not contain any detectable prophage regions. The remaining eleven contained 38 prophage sequences, with between one and eight putative prophages in each bacterial genome. The prophage regions ranged from 12.4 to 75.1 kb, with between 27 and 171 protein coding sequences. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that 24 of the prophages formed three distinct sequence clusters, identifying putative myoviral and siphoviral morphology. ViPTree analysis demonstrated that the identified sequences were novel when compared to known double stranded DNA bacteriophage genomes. Conclusions In this study, we have started to address the knowledge gap on treponeme bacteriophages by characterising 38 prophage sequences in 24 treponeme genomes. Using bioinformatic approaches, we have been able to identify and compare the prophage-like elements with respect to other bacteriophages, their gene content, and their potential to be a functional and inducible bacteriophage, which in turn can help focus our attention on specific prophages to investigate further.
Pili are bacterial surface structures important for surface adhesion. In the alphaproteobacterium Caulobacter crescentus, the global regulator CtrA activates transcription of roughly 100 genes, including pilA which codes for the pilin monomer that makes up the pilus filament. While most CtrA-activated promoters have a single CtrA-binding site at the - 35 position and are induced at the early to mid-predivisional cell stage, the pilA promoter has 3 additional upstream CtrA-binding sites and it is induced at the late predivisional cell stage. Reporter constructs where these additional sites were disrupted by deletion or mutation led to increased activity compared to the WT promoter. In synchronized cultures, these mutations caused pilA transcription to occur approximately 20 min earlier than WT. The results suggested that the site overlapping the - 35 position drives pilA gene expression while the other upstream CtrA-binding sites serve to reduce and delay expression. EMSA experiments showed that the - 35 Site has lower affinity for CtrA similar to P compared to the other sites, suggesting binding site affinity may be involved in the delay mechanism. Mutating the upstream inhibitory CtrA-binding sites in the pilA promoter caused significantly higher numbers of pre-divisional cells to express pili, and phage survival assays showed this strain to be significantly more sensitive to pilitropic phage. These results suggest that pilA regulation evolved in C. crescentus to provide an ecological advantage within the context of phage infection.
Animals plastically adjust their physiological and behavioural phenotypes to conform to their social environment-social niche conformance. The degree of sexual competition is a critical part of the social environment to which animals adjust their phenotypes, but the underlying genetic mechanisms are poorly understood. We conducted a study to investigate how differences in sperm competition risk affect the gene expression profiles of the testes and two brain areas (posterior pallium and optic tectum) in breeding male zebra finches (Taeniopygia castanotis). In this pre-registered study, we investigated a large sample of 59 individual transcriptomes. We compared two experimental groups: males held in single breeding pairs (low sexual competition) versus those held in two pairs (elevated sexual competition) per breeding cage. Using weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), we observed significant effects of the social treatment in all three tissues. However, only the treatment effects found in the pallium were confirmed by an additional randomisation test for statistical robustness. Likewise, the differential gene expression analysis revealed treatment effects only in the posterior pallium (ten genes) and optic tectum (six genes). No treatment effects were found in the testis at the single gene level. Thus, our experiments do not provide strong evidence for transcriptomic adjustment specific to manipulated sperm competition risk. However, we did observe transcriptomic adjustments to the manipulated social environment in the posterior pallium. These effects were polygenic rather than based on few individual genes with strong effects. Our findings are discussed in relation to an accompanying paper using the same animals, which reports behavioural results consistent with the results presented here.
BackgroundReproductive efficiency is crucial for the long-term economic sustainability of beef cattle production. Pregnancy loss and stillbirth are complex reproductive traits that do not yet have their genomic background fully understood, especially in zebu breeds (Bos taurus indicus). Hence, this study aimed to perform a genome-wide association study (GWAS) and functional annotation for conception success (CS), pregnancy loss (PL), stillbirth (SB), and pre-weaning calf mortality (PWM) in Nellore cattle. In this study, 3,728 cows with 17,094 reproductive records and 11,785 calves were evaluated. A total of 3,351 genotyped animals and 383,739 SNP markers were considered for GWAS analyses. SNP effects were estimated using the weighted single-step GWAS (WssGWAS), which considered two iterations. The top ten genomic windows with the highest contribution to the additive genetic variance of the traits were selected for gene annotation. Candidate genes were then analyzed for Gene Ontology terms (GO) and metabolic pathways.ResultsThe top ten genomic windows that explained the largest proportion of the direct additive genetic variance (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\:{{\sigma\:}}_{\text{a}}<^>{2}$$\end{document}) for CS, PL, SB, and PWM accounted for 17.03% (overlapping with 79 genes), 16.76% (57 genes), 11.71% (73 genes), and 12.03% (65 genes) of the total \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\:{{\sigma\:}}_{\text{a}}<^>{2}$$\end{document}, respectively. For CS, significant GO terms included Somitogenesis (GO:0001756), Somite Development (GO:0061053), and Chromosome Segregation (GO:0007059). Considering PL, the processes annotated were the Regulation of Hormone Secretion (GO:0046883), and Hormone Transport (GO:0009914), along with the Glucagon Signaling Pathway (bta04922). Embryonic Development (GO:0045995), and Cerebellum Development (GO:0021549) were the main biological processes found in the gene enrichment analysis for SB. For PWM, the Regulation of Glucose metabolic processes (GO:0010906), Zinc Ion Homeostasis (GO:0055069), Lactation (GO:0007595), and Regulation of Insulin Secretion (GO:0050796) were the most significant GO terms observed.ConclusionsThese findings provide valuable information on genomic regions, candidate genes, biological processes, and metabolic pathways that may significantly influence the expression of complex reproductive traits in Nellore cattle, offering potential contributions to breeding strategies and future genomic selection strategies.
BackgroundProtein-coding genes have been considered the functional part of the genome, although they represent only 2% of the genome. In contrast, more than 90% of the genome produces non-coding RNA (ncRNA), including antisense (AS) genes, a type of long non-coding genes (encoding transcripts > 200 nucleotides) located on the opposite strand of coding genes. Therefore, antisense RNA (asRNA) can be complementary to the counterpart sense RNA, supporting a regulatory role with potential pathogenic consequences, as their deregulation has been associated with cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes. ResultsWe performed an in-depth review of AS genes in Ensembl and evaluated the expression of AS genes in human liver by third-generation RNA sequencing methods. Currently, 1656 AS genes overlapping with 1556 sense genes have been identified in the human genome. Coding genes with antisense counterparts were significantly larger and had higher transcriptional activity than genes without antisense counterparts. RNA nanopore sequencing of 15 human livers identified 185 transcripts (55 novel) from 150 known AS genes, and 1316 transcripts from 807 sense genes, with 111 sense-antisense pairs. Sense transcripts showed higher expression than antisense transcripts. Remarkably, RNA nanopore sequencing of human livers identified 146 transcripts (67 novel) corresponding to 118 possible novel AS genes. ConclusionThis study reveals the landscape of AS genes in the human genome and demonstrates the power of long-read RNA sequencing to identify novel transcripts and even novel AS genes, exploring the relationship between sense and AS gene expression as well.
Background Mammalian testis is a highly complex and heterogeneous tissue. This complexity, which mostly derives from spermatogenic cells, is reflected at the transcriptional level, with the largest number of tissue-specific genes and long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) compared to other tissues, and one of the highest rates of alternative splicing. Although it is known that adequate alternative-splicing patterns and stage-specific isoforms are critical for successful spermatogenesis, so far only a very limited number of reports have addressed a detailed study of alternative splicing and isoforms along the different spermatogenic stages.Results In the present work, using highly purified stage-specific testicular cell populations, we detected 33,002 transcripts expressed throughout mouse spermatogenesis not annotated so far. These include both splice variants of already annotated genes, and of hitherto unannotated genes. Using conservative criteria, we uncovered 13,471 spermatogenic lncRNAs, which reflects the still incomplete annotation of lncRNAs. A distinctive feature of lncRNAs was their lower number of splice variants compared to protein-coding ones, adding to the conclusion that lncRNAs are, in general, less complex than mRNAs. Besides, we identified 2,794 unannotated transcripts with high coding potential (including some arising from yet unannotated genes), many of which encode unnoticed putative testis-specific proteins. Some of the most interesting coding splice variants were chosen, and validated through RT-PCR. Remarkably, the largest number of stage-specific unannotated transcripts are expressed during early meiotic prophase stages, whose study has been scarcely addressed in former transcriptomic analyses.Conclusions We detected a high number of yet unannotated genes and alternatively spliced transcripts along mouse spermatogenesis, hence showing that the transcriptomic diversity of the testis is considerably higher than previously reported. This is especially prominent for specific, underrepresented stages such as those of early meiotic prophase, and its unveiling may constitute a step towards the understanding of their key events.
Background The cashmere goat industry is one of the main pillars of animal husbandry in Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, and plays an irreplaceable role in local economic development. With the change in feeding methods and environment, the cashmere produced by Inner Mongolia cashmere goats shows a tendency of coarser, and the cashmere yield can not meet the consumption demand of people. However, the genetic basis behind these changes is not fully understood. We measured cashmere traits, including cashmere yield (CY), cashmere diameter (CD), cashmere thickness (CT), and fleece length (FL) traits for four consecutive years, and utilized Genome-wide association study of four cashmere traits in Inner Mongolia cashmere goats was carried out using new genomics tools to infer genomic regions and functional loci associated with cashmere traits and to construct haplotypes that significantly affect cashmere traits.
Background The folate cycle of one-carbon (C1) metabolism, which plays a central role in the biosynthesis of nucleotides and amino acids, demonstrates the significance of metabolic adaptation. We investigated the evolutionary history of the methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (mTHF) gene family, one of the main drivers of the folate cycle, across life.Results Through comparative genomic and phylogenetic analyses, we found that several lineages of Archaea lacked domains vital for folate cycle function such as the mTHF catalytic and NAD(P)-binding domains of FolD. Within eukaryotes, the mTHF gene family diversified rapidly. For example, several duplications have been observed in lineages including the Amoebozoa, Opisthokonta, and Viridiplantae. In a common ancestor of Opisthokonta, FolD and FTHFS underwent fusion giving rise to the gene MTHFD1, possessing the domains of both genes.Conclusions Our evolutionary reconstruction of the mTHF gene family associated with a primary metabolic pathway reveals dynamic evolution, including gene birth-and-death, gene fusion, and potential horizontal gene transfer events and/or amino acid convergence.
Background The colonization of land and the diversification of terrestrial plants is intimately linked to the evolutionary history of their symbiotic fungal partners. Extant representatives of these fungal lineages include mutualistic plant symbionts, the arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi in Glomeromycota and fine root endophytes in Endogonales (Mucoromycota), as well as fungi with saprotrophic, pathogenic and endophytic lifestyles. These fungal groups separate into three monophyletic lineages but their evolutionary relationships remain enigmatic confounding ancestral reconstructions. Their taxonomic ranks are currently fluid.Results In this study, we recognize these three monophyletic linages as phyla, and use a balanced taxon sampling and broad taxonomic representation for phylogenomic analysis that rejects a hard polytomy and resolves Glomeromycota as sister to a clade composed of Mucoromycota and Mortierellomycota. Low copy numbers of genes associated with plant cell wall degradation could not be assigned to the transition to a plant symbiotic lifestyle but appears to be an ancestral phylogenetic signal. Both plant symbiotic lineages, Glomeromycota and Endogonales, lack numerous thiamine metabolism genes but the lack of fatty acid synthesis genes is specific to AM fungi. Many genes previously thought to be missing specifically in Glomeromycota are either missing in all analyzed phyla, or in some cases, are actually present in some of the analyzed AM fungal lineages, e.g. the high affinity phosphorus transporter Pho89.Conclusion Based on a broad taxon sampling of fungal genomes we present a well-supported phylogeny for AM fungi and their sister lineages. We show that among these lineages, two independent evolutionary transitions to mutualistic plant symbiosis happened in a genomic background profoundly different from that known from the emergence of ectomycorrhizal fungi in Dikarya. These results call for further reevaluation of genomic signatures associated with plant symbiosis.
Caddisfly larvae produce silk containing heavy and light fibroins, similar to the silk of Lepidoptera, for the construction of underwater structures. We analyzed the silk of Limnephilus lunatus belonging to the case-forming suborder Integripalpia. We analyzed the transcriptome, mapped the transcripts to a reference genome and identified over 80 proteins using proteomic methods, and checked the specificity of their expression. For comparison, we also analyzed the transcriptome and silk proteome of Limnephilus flavicornis. Our results show that fibroins and adhesives are produced together in the middle and posterior parts of the silk glands, while the anterior part produces enzymes and an unknown protein AT24. The number of silk proteins of L. lunatus far exceeds that of the web-spinning Plectrocnemia conspersa, a previously described species from the suborder Annulipalpia. Our results support the idea of increasing the structural complexity of silk in rigid case builders compared to trap web builders.
Background Alfalfa (Medicago sativa. L) is one of the best leguminous herbage in China and even in the world, with high nutritional and ecological value. However, one of the drawbacks of alfalfa is its sensitivity to dry conditions, which is a global agricultural problem. The objective of this study was to investigate the regulatory effects of endogenous nitric oxide (NO) on endogenous hormones and related miRNAs in alfalfa seedling leaves under drought stress. The effects of endogenous NO on endogenous hormones such as ABA, GA3, SA, and IAA in alfalfa leaves under drought stress were studied. In addition, high-throughput sequencing technology was used to identify drought-related miRNAs and endogenous NO-responsive miRNAs in alfalfa seedling leaves under drought stress. Result By measuring the contents of four endogenous hormones in alfalfa leaves, it was found that endogenous NO could regulate plant growth and stress resistance by inducing the metabolism levels of IAA, ABA, GA3, and SA in alfalfa, especially ABA and SA in alfalfa. In addition, small RNA sequencing technology and bioinformatics methods were used to analyze endogenous NO-responsive miRNAs under drought stress. It was found that most miRNAs were enriched in biological pathways and molecular functions related to hormones (ABA, ETH, and JA), phenylpropane metabolism, and plant stress tolerance. Conclusion In this study, the analysis of endogenous hormone signals and miRNAs in alfalfa leaves under PEG and PEG + cPTIO conditions provided an important basis for endogenous NO to improve the drought resistance of alfalfa at the physiological and molecular levels. It has important scientific value and practical significance for endogenous NO to improve plant drought resistance.
Background Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) is an economically and ecologically important fish species in the family Nototheniidae. Juveniles occupy progressively deeper waters as they mature and grow, and adults have been caught as deep as 2500 m, living on or in just above the southern shelves and slopes around the sub-Antarctic islands of the Southern Ocean. As apex predators, they are a key part of the food web, feeding on a variety of prey, including krill, squid, and other fish. Despite its importance, genomic sequence data, which could be used for more accurate dating of the divergence between Patagonian and Antarctic toothfish, or establish whether it shares adaptations to temperature with fish living in more polar or equatorial climes, has so far been limited. Results A high-quality D. eleginoides genome was generated using a combination of Illumina, PacBio and Omni-C sequencing technologies. To aid the genome annotation, the transcriptome derived from a variety of toothfish tissues was also generated using both short and long read sequencing methods. The final genome assembly was 797.8 Mb with a N50 scaffold length of 3.5 Mb. Approximately 31.7% of the genome consisted of repetitive elements. A total of 35,543 putative protein-coding regions were identified, of which 50% have been functionally annotated. Transcriptomics analysis showed that approximately 64% of the predicted genes (22,617 genes) were found to be expressed in the tissues sampled. Comparative genomics analysis revealed that the anti-freeze glycoprotein (AFGP) locus of D. eleginoides does not contain any AFGP proteins compared to the same locus in the Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus mawsoni). This is in agreement with previously published results looking at hybridization signals and confirms that Patagonian toothfish do not possess AFGP coding sequences in their genome. Conclusions We have assembled and annotated the Patagonian toothfish genome, which will provide a valuable genetic resource for ecological and evolutionary studies on this and other closely related species.
Background Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) are debilitating diseases associated with divergent histopathological changes in the lungs. At present, due to cost and technical limitations, profiling cell types is not practical in large epidemiology cohorts (n > 1000). Here, we used computational deconvolution to identify cell types in COPD and IPF lungs whose abundances and cell type-specific gene expression are associated with disease diagnosis and severity. Results We analyzed lung tissue RNA-seq data from 1026 subjects (COPD, n = 465; IPF, n = 213; control, n = 348) from the Lung Tissue Research Consortium. We performed RNA-seq deconvolution, querying thirty-eight discrete cell-type varieties in the lungs. We tested whether deconvoluted cell-type abundance and cell type-specific gene expression were associated with disease severity. The abundance score of twenty cell types significantly differed between IPF and control lungs. In IPF subjects, eleven and nine cell types were significantly associated with forced vital capacity (FVC) and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO), respectively. Aberrant basaloid cells, a rare cells found in fibrotic lungs, were associated with worse FVC and DLCO in IPF subjects, indicating that this aberrant epithelial population increased with disease severity. Alveolar type 1 and vascular endothelial (VE) capillary A were decreased in COPD lungs compared to controls. An increase in macrophages and classical monocytes was associated with lower DLCO in IPF and COPD subjects. In both diseases, lower non-classical monocytes and VE capillary A cells were associated with increased disease severity. Alveolar type 2 cells and alveolar macrophages had the highest number of genes with cell type-specific differential expression by disease severity in COPD and IPF. In IPF, genes implicated in the pathogenesis of IPF, such as matrix metallopeptidase 7, growth differentiation factor 15, and eph receptor B2, were associated with disease severity in a cell type-specific manner. Conclusions Utilization of RNA-seq deconvolution enabled us to pinpoint cell types present in the lungs that are associated with the severity of COPD and IPF. This knowledge offers valuable insight into the alterations within tissues in more advanced illness, ultimately providing a better understanding of the underlying pathological processes that drive disease progression.
BackgroundMetabarcoding targeting the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region is commonly used to characterize fungal communities of various environments. Given their size and complexity, raw ITS sequences are necessarily processed and quality-filtered with bioinformatic pipelines. However, such pipelines are not yet standardized, especially for fungal communities, and those available may produce contrasting results. While some pipelines cluster sequences based on a specified percentage of base pair similarity into operational taxonomic units (OTUs), others utilize denoising techniques to infer amplicon sequencing variants (ASVs). While ASVs are now considered a more accurate representation of taxonomic diversity for prokaryote communities based on 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, the applicability of this method for fungal ITS sequences is still debated.ResultsHere we compared the performance of two commonly used pipelines DADA2 (inferring ASVs) and mothur (clustering OTUs) on fungal metabarcoding sequences originating from two different environmental sample types (fresh bovine feces and pasture soil). At a 99% OTU similarity threshold, mothur consistently identified a higher fungal richness compared to DADA2. In addition, mothur generated homogenous relative abundances across multiple technical replicates (n = 18), while DADA2 results for the same replicates were highly heterogeneous.ConclusionsOur study highlights a potential pipeline-associated bias in fungal metabarcoding data analysis of environmental samples. Based on the homogeneity of relative abundances across replicates and the capacity to detect OTUs/ASVs, we suggest using OTU clustering with a similarity of 97% as the most appropriate option for processing fungal metabarcoding data.
In this work, a novel isatin-Schiff base L2 had been synthesized through a simple reaction between isatin and 2-amino-5-methylthio-1,3,4-thiadiazole. The produced Schiff base L2 was then subjected to a hydrothermal reaction with cerium chloride to produce the cerium (III)-Schiff base complex C2. Several spectroscopic methods, including mass spectra, FT-IR, elemental analysis, UV-vis, 13C-NMR, 1H-NMR, Thermogravimetric Analysis, HR-TEM, and FE-SEM/EDX, were used to completely characterize the produced L2 and C2. A computer simulation was performed using the MOE software program to find out the probable biological resistance of studied compounds against the proteins in some types of bacteria or fungi. To investigate the interaction between the ligand and its complex, we conducted molecular docking simulations using the molecular operating environment (MOE). The docking simulation findings revealed that the complex displayed greater efficacy and demonstrated a stronger affinity for Avr2 effector protein from the fungal plant pathogen Fusarium oxysporum (code 5OD4) than the original ligand. The antibacterial activity of the ligand and its Ce3+ complex were applied in vitro tests against different microorganism. The study showed that the complex was found to be more effective than the ligand.
Background Hemocytes are immune cells that patrol the mosquito hemocoel and mediate critical cellular defense responses against pathogens. However, despite their importance, a comprehensive transcriptome of these cells was lacking because they constitute a very small fraction of the total cells in the insect, limiting the study of hemocyte differentiation and immune function. Results In this study, an in-depth hemocyte transcriptome was built by extensive bulk RNA sequencing and assembly of hemocyte RNAs from adult A. gambiae female mosquitoes, based on approximately 2.4 billion short Illumina and about 9.4 million long PacBio high-quality reads that mapped to the A. gambiae PEST genome (P4.14 version). A total of 34,939 transcripts were annotated including 4,020 transcripts from novel genes and 20,008 novel isoforms that result from extensive differential splicing of transcripts from previously annotated genes. Most hemocyte transcripts identified (89.8%) are protein-coding while 10.2% are non-coding RNAs. The number of transcripts identified in the novel hemocyte transcriptome is twice the number in the current annotation of the A. gambiae genome (P4.14 version). Furthermore, we were able to refine the analysis of a previously published single-cell transcriptome (scRNAseq) data set by using the novel hemocyte transcriptome as a reference to re-define the hemocyte clusters and determine the path of hemocyte differentiation. Unsupervised pseudo-temporal ordering using the Tools for Single Cell Analysis software uncovered a novel putative prohemocyte precursor cell type that gives rise to prohemocytes. Pseudo-temporal ordering with the Monocle 3 software, which analyses changes in gene expression during dynamic biological processes, determined that oenocytoids derive from prohemocytes, a cell population that also gives rise to the granulocyte lineage. Conclusion A high number of mRNA splice variants are expressed in hemocytes, and they may account for the plasticity required to mount efficient responses to many different pathogens. This study highlights the importance of a comprehensive set of reference transcripts to perform robust single-cell transcriptomic data analysis of cells present in low abundance. The detailed annotation of the hemocyte transcriptome will uncover new facets of hemocyte development and function in adult dipterans and is a valuable community resource for future studies on mosquito cellular immunity.
Background Insecticide resistance (IR) is one of the major threats to malaria vector control programs in endemic countries. However, the mechanisms underlying IR are poorly understood. Thus, investigating gene expression patterns related to IR can offer important insights into the molecular basis of IR in mosquitoes. In this study, RNA-Seq was used to characterize gene expression in Anopheles gambiae surviving exposure to pyrethroids (deltamethrin, alphacypermethrin) and an organophosphate (pirimiphos-methyl). Results Larvae of An. gambiae s.s. collected from Bassila and Djougou in Benin were reared to adulthood and phenotyped for IR using a modified CDC intensity bottle bioassay. The results showed that mosquitoes from Djougou were more resistant to pyrethroids (5X deltamethrin: 51.7% mortality; 2X alphacypermethrin: 47.4%) than Bassila (1X deltamethrin: 70.7%; 1X alphacypermethrin: 77.7%), while the latter were more resistant to pirimiphos-methyl (1.5X: 48.3% in Bassila and 1X: 21.5% in Djougou). RNA-seq was then conducted on resistant mosquitoes, non-exposed mosquitoes from the same locations and the laboratory-susceptible An. gambiae s.s. Kisumu strain. The results showed overexpression of detoxification genes, including cytochrome P450s (CYP12F2, CYP12F3, CYP4H15, CYP4H17, CYP6Z3, CYP9K1, CYP4G16, and CYP4D17), carboxylesterase genes (COEJHE5E, COE22933) and glutathione S-transferases (GSTE2 and GSTMS3) in all three resistant mosquito groups analyzed. Genes encoding cuticular proteins (CPR130, CPR10, CPR15, CPR16, CPR127, CPAP3-C, CPAP3-B, and CPR76) were also overexpressed in all the resistant groups, indicating their potential role in cross resistance in An. gambiae. Salivary gland protein genes related to 'salivary cysteine-rich peptide' and 'salivary secreted mucin 3' were also over-expressed and shared across all resistant groups. Conclusion Our results suggest that in addition to metabolic enzymes, cuticular and salivary gland proteins could play an important role in cross-resistance to multiple classes of insecticides in Benin. These genes warrant further investigation to validate their functional role in An. gambiae resistance to insecticides.
The proteasome plays a crucial role in cellular homeostasis by degrading misfolded, damaged, or unnecessary proteins. Understanding the regulatory mechanisms of proteasome activity is vital, particularly the interaction with activators containing the hydrophobic-tyrosine-any amino acid (HbYX) motif. Here, we present ProEnd, a comprehensive database designed to identify and catalog HbYX motif-containing proteins across the tree of life. Using a simple bioinformatics pipeline, we analyzed approximately 73 million proteins from 22,000 reference proteomes in the UniProt/SwissProt database. Our findings reveal the widespread presence of HbYX motifs in diverse organisms, highlighting their evolutionary conservation and functional significance. Notably, we observed an interesting prevalence of these motifs in viral proteomes, suggesting strategic interactions with the host proteasome. As validation two novel HbYX proteins found in this database were experimentally tested by pulldowns, confirming that they directly interact with the proteasome, with one of them directly activating it. ProEnd's extensive dataset and user-friendly interface enable researchers to explore the potential proteasomal regulator landscape, generating new hypotheses to advance proteasome biology. This resource is set to facilitate the discovery of novel therapeutic targets, enhancing our approach to treating diseases such as neurodegenerative disorders and cancer.
Introduction The Ovar-DRB1 gene, a crucial element of the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) Class II region, initiates adaptive immunity by presenting antigens to T-cells. Genetic diversity in sheep, particularly in MHC Class II genes like Ovar-DRB1, directly influences the specturm of presented antigens impacting immune responses and disease susceptability. Understanding the allelic diversity of Ovar-DRB1 gene in Sudan Desert Sheep (SDS) is essential for uncovering the genetic basis of immune responses and disease resistance, given the the breeds significance in Sudan's unique environment. Methods Utilizing Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) we explore allelic diversity in Ovar-DRB1 gene within SDS. Successfully ampliying and and sequencing the second exon of this gene in 288 SDS samples representing six breeds provided a comprehensive allelic profile, enabling a detalied examination of the gene's genetic makeup. Results We identifed forty-six alleles, including four previously unreported, enrichness the genetic diversity of SDS breeds. These alleles exhibiting non-uniform distribution, varying frequencies across breeds, indicating a breed-specific genetic landscape. Certain alleles, known and novel, show higher frequencies in specific populations, suggesting potential associations with adaptive immune responses. Identifying these alleles sets the stage for investigating their functional roles and implications for disease resistance. Genetic differentiation among SDS breeds, as indicated by FST values and clustering analyses, highlights a unique genetic makeup shaped by geographic and historical factors. These differentiation patterns among SDS breeds have broader implications for breed conservation and targeted breeding to enhance disease resistance in specific populations. Conclusion This study unveils Ovar-DRB1 gene allelic diversity in SDS breeds through targeted NGS and genetic analyses, revealing new alleles that underscore the breeds' unique genetic profile. Insights into the genetic factors governing immune responses and disease resistance emerge, promising for optimization of breeding strategies for enhanced livestock health in Sudan's unique environment.
Faba bean is an important legume crop. The genetic diversity among faba bean genotypes is very important for the genetic improvement of target traits. A set of 128 fab bean genotypes that are originally from Egypt were used in this study to investigate the genetic diversity and population structure. The 128 genotypes were genotyped using the Single Primer Enrichment Technology (SPET) by which a set of 6759 SNP markers were generated after filtration. The SNP markers were distributed on all chromosomes with a range extending from 822 (Chr. 6) to 1872 (Chr.1). The SNP markers had wide ranges of polymorphic information content (PIC), gene diversity (GD), and minor allele frequency. The analysis of population structure divided the Egyptian faba bean population into five subpopulations. Considerable genetic distance was found among all genotypes, ranging from 0.1 to 0.4. The highly divergent genotype was highlighted in this study and the genetic distance among genotypes ranged from 0.1 and 0.6. Moreover, the structure of linkage disequilibrium was studied, and the analysis revealed a low level of LD in the Egyptian faba bean population. A slow LD decay at the genomic and chromosomal levels was observed. Interestingly, the distribution of haplotype blocks was presented in each chromosome and the number of haplotype block ranged from 65 (Chr. 4) to 156 (Chr. 1). Migration and genetic drift are the main reasons for the low LD in the Egyptian faba bean population. The results of this study shed light on the possibility of the genetic improvement of faba bean crop in Egypt and conducting genetic association analyses to identify candidate genes associated with target traits (e.g. protein content, grain yield, etc.) in this panel.
Background Myxozoa is a class of cnidarian parasites that encompasses over 2,400 species. Phylogenetic relationships among myxozoans remain highly debated, owing to both a lack of informative morphological characters and a shortage of molecular markers. Mitochondrial (mt) genomes are a common marker in phylogeny and biogeography. However, only five complete myxozoan mt genomes have been sequenced: four belonging to two closely related genera, Enteromyxum and Kudoa, and one from the genus Myxobolus. Interestingly, while cytochrome oxidase genes could be identified in Enteromyxum and Kudoa, no such genes were found in Myxobolus squamalis, and another member of the Myxobolidae (Henneguya salminicola) was found to have lost its entire mt genome. To evaluate the utility of mt genomes to reconstruct myxozoan relationships and to understand if the loss of cytochrome oxidase genes is a characteristic of myxobolids, we sequenced the mt genome of five myxozoans (Myxobolus wulii, M. honghuensis, M. shantungensis, Thelohanellus kitauei and, Sphaeromyxa zaharoni) using Illumina and Oxford Nanopore platforms.Results Unlike Enteromyxum, which possesses a partitioned mt genome, the five mt genomes were encoded on single circular chromosomes. An mt plasmid was found in M. wulii, as described previously in Kudoa iwatai. In all new myxozoan genomes, five protein-coding genes (cob, cox1, cox2, nad1, and nad5) and two rRNAs (rnl and rns) were recognized, but no tRNA. We found that Myxobolus and Thelohanellus species shared unidentified reading frames, supporting the view that these mt open reading frames are functional. Our phylogenetic reconstructions based on the five conserved mt genes agree with previously published trees based on the 18S rRNA gene.Conclusions Our results suggest that the loss of cytochrome oxidase genes is not a characteristic of all myxobolids, the ancestral myxozoan mt genome was likely encoded on a single circular chromosome, and mt plasmids exist in a few lineages. Our findings indicate that myxozoan mt sequences are poor markers for reconstructing myxozoan phylogenetic relationships because of their fast-evolutionary rates and the abundance of repeated elements, which complicates assembly.
Background Genome-wide comparisons of populations are widely used to explore the patterns of nucleotide diversity and sequence divergence to provide knowledge on how natural selection and genetic drift affect the genome. In this study we have compared whole-genome sequencing data from Atlantic and Pacific herring, two sister species that diverged about 2 million years ago, to explore the pattern of genetic differentiation between the two species.Results The genome comparison of the two species revealed high genome-wide differentiation but with islands of remarkably low genetic differentiation, as measured by an F ST analysis. However, the low F ST observed in these islands is not caused by low interspecies sequence divergence (d xy ) but rather by exceptionally high estimated intraspecies nucleotide diversity (pi). These regions of low differentiation and elevated nucleotide diversity, termed high-diversity regions in this study, are not enriched for repeats but are highly enriched for immune-related genes. This enrichment includes genes from both the adaptive immune system, such as immunoglobulin, T-cell receptor and major histocompatibility complex genes, as well as a substantial number of genes with a role in the innate immune system, e.g. novel immune-type receptor, tripartite motif and tumor necrosis factor receptor genes. Analysis of long-read based assemblies from two Atlantic herring individuals revealed extensive copy number variation in these genomic regions, indicating that the elevated intraspecies nucleotide diversities were partially due to the cross-mapping of short reads.Conclusions This study demonstrates that copy number variation is a characteristic feature of immune trait loci in herring. Another important implication is that these loci are blind spots in classical genome-wide screens for genetic differentiation using short-read data, not only in herring, likely also in other species harboring qualitatively similar variation at immune trait loci. These loci stood out in this study because of the relatively high genome-wide baseline for F ST values between Atlantic and Pacific herring.
Background Cyclospora cayetanensis is a protozoan parasite that causes intestinal illness in humans worldwide. Despite its global distribution, most genomic data for C. cayetanensis has been obtained from isolates collected in the United States, leaving genetic variability among globally distributed isolates underexplored. Results In the present study, the genome of an isolate of C. cayetanensis obtained from a child with diarrhea living in Mexico was sequenced and assembled. Evaluation of the assembly using a lineage typing system recently developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention revealed that this isolate is lineage A. Conclusions Given that the only other whole genome assembly available from Mexico was classified as lineage B, the data presented here represent an important step in expanding our knowledge of the diversity of C. cayetanensis isolates from Mexico at the genomic level.
BackgroundThe invasive pest Spotted-Wing Drosophila, Drosophila suzukii (Matsumura), causes extensive damage and production losses of soft-skinned fruits. Native to Asia, the species has now spread worldwide, with first reports in Portugal in 2012. In this study, we focus on the genomic signatures of the recent Portuguese invasion, in the context of worldwide patterns established in previous works. We analyzed whole genome pool sequencing data from three Portuguese populations (N = 240) sampled in 2019 and 2021. ResultsThe correlation of allele frequencies suggested that Portuguese populations are related to South European ones, indicating a Mediterranean invasion route. While two populations exhibited levels of genetic variation comparable to others in the invasive range, a third showed low levels of genetic diversity, which may result from a recent colonization of the region. Genome-wide analyses of natural selection identified ten genes previously associated with D. suzukii's invasive capacity, which may have contributed to the species' success in Portugal. Additionally, we pinpointed six genes evolving under positive selection across Portuguese populations but not in European ones, which is indicative of local adaptation. One of these genes, nAChRalpha7, encodes a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, which are known targets for insecticides widely used for D. suzukii control, such as neonicotinoids and spinosyns. Although spinosyn resistance has been associated with mutations in the nAChRalpha6 in other Drosophila species, the putative role of nAChRalpha7 in insecticide resistance and local adaptation in Portuguese D. suzukii populations encourages future investigation. ConclusionsOur results highlight the complex nature of rapid species invasions and the role of rapid local adaptation in determining the invasive capacity of these species.
Background Appropriate regulation of genes expressed in oocytes and embryos is essential for acquisition of developmental competence in mammals. Here, we hypothesized that several genes expressed in oocytes and pre-implantation embryos remain unknown. Our goal was to reconstruct the transcriptome of oocytes (germinal vesicle and metaphase II) and pre-implantation cattle embryos (blastocysts) using short-read and long-read sequences to identify putative new genes. Results We identified 274,342 transcript sequences and 3,033 of those loci do not match a gene present in official annotations and thus are potential new genes. Notably, 63.67% (1,931/3,033) of potential novel genes exhibited coding potential. Also noteworthy, 97.92% of the putative novel genes overlapped annotation with transposable elements. Comparative analysis of transcript abundance identified that 1,840 novel genes (recently added to the annotation) or potential new genes were differentially expressed between developmental stages (FDR < 0.01). We also determined that 522 novel or potential new genes (448 and 34, respectively) were upregulated at eight-cell embryos compared to oocytes (FDR < 0.01). In eight-cell embryos, 102 novel or putative new genes were co-expressed (|r|> 0.85, P < 1 x 10(-8)) with several genes annotated with gene ontology biological processes related to pluripotency maintenance and embryo development. CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing confirmed that the disruption of one of the novel genes highly expressed in eight-cell embryos reduced blastocyst development (ENSBTAG00000068261, P = 1.55 x 10(-7)). Conclusions Our results revealed several putative new genes that need careful annotation. Many of the putative new genes have dynamic regulation during pre-implantation development and are important components of gene regulatory networks involved in pluripotency and blastocyst formation.
Diabetes cell replacement therapy has the potential to be transformed by human pluripotent stem cell-derived beta cells (SC-beta cells). However, the precise identity of SC-beta cells in relationship to primary fetal and adult beta-cells remains unclear. Here, we used single-cell sequencing datasets to characterize the transcriptional identity of islets from in vitro differentiation, fetal islets, and adult islets. Our analysis revealed that SC-beta cells share a core beta-cell transcriptional identity with human adult and fetal beta-cells, however SC-beta cells possess a unique transcriptional profile characterized by the persistent expression and activation of progenitor and neural-biased gene networks. These networks are present in SC-beta cells, irrespective of the derivation protocol used. Notably, fetal beta-cells also exhibit this neural signature at the transcriptional level. Our findings offer insights into the transcriptional identity of SC-beta cells and underscore the need for further investigation of the role of neural transcriptional networks in their development.
ObjectiveTo evaluate the contribution of germline genetics to regulating the briskness and diversity of T cell responses in CRC, we conducted a genome-wide association study to examine the associations between germline genetic variation and quantitative measures of T cell landscapes in 2,876 colorectal tumors from participants in the Molecular Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Study (MECC).MethodsGermline DNA samples were genotyped and imputed using genome-wide arrays. Tumor DNA samples were extracted from paraffin blocks, and T cell receptor clonality and abundance were quantified by immunoSEQ (Adaptive Biotechnologies, Seattle, WA). Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes per high powered field (TILs/hpf) were scored by a gastrointestinal pathologist. Regression models were used to evaluate the associations between each variant and the three T-cell features, adjusting for sex, age, genotyping platform, and global ancestry. Three independent datasets were used for replication.ResultsWe identified a SNP (rs4918567) near RBM20 associated with clonality at a genome-wide significant threshold of 5 x 10- 8, with a consistent direction of association in both discovery and replication datasets. Expression quantitative trait (eQTL) analyses and in silico functional annotation for these loci provided insights into potential functional roles, including a statistically significant eQTL between the T allele at rs4918567 and higher expression of ADRA2A (P = 0.012) in healthy colon mucosa.ConclusionsOur study suggests that germline genetic variation is associated with the quantity and diversity of adaptive immune responses in CRC. Further studies are warranted to replicate these findings in additional samples and to investigate functional genomic mechanisms.
Background Over the last decades, it was subject of many studies to investigate the genomic connection of milk production and health traits in dairy cattle. Thereby, incorporating functional information in genomic analyses has been shown to improve the understanding of biological and molecular mechanisms shaping complex traits and the accuracies of genomic prediction, especially in small populations and across-breed settings. Still, little is known about the contribution of different functional and evolutionary genome partitioning subsets to milk production and dairy health. Thus, we performed a uni- and a bivariate analysis of milk yield (MY) and eight health traits using a set of similar to 34,497 German Holstein cows with 50K chip genotypes and similar to 17 million imputed sequence variants divided into 27 subsets depending on their functional and evolutionary annotation. In the bivariate analysis, eight trait-combinations were observed that contrasted MY with each health trait. Two genomic relationship matrices (GRM) were included, one consisting of the 50K chip variants and one consisting of each set of subset variants, to obtain subset heritabilities and genetic correlations. In addition, 50K chip heritabilities and genetic correlations were estimated applying merely the 50K GRM.
Since the introduction of next generation sequencing technologies, the field of epigenomics has evolved rapidly. However, most commonly used assays are enrichment-based methods and thus only semi-quantitative. Nucleosome occupancy and methylome sequencing (NOMe-seq) allows for quantitative inference of chromatin states with single locus resolution, but this requires high sequencing depth and is therefore prohibitively expensive to routinely apply to organisms with large genomes. To overcome this limitation, we introduce guidedNOMe-seq, where we combine NOMe profiling with large scale sgRNA synthesis and Cas9-mediated region-of-interest (ROI) liberation. To facilitate quantitative comparisons between multiple samples, we additionally develop an R package to standardize differential analysis of any type of NOMe-seq data. We extensively benchmark guidedNOMe-seq in a proof-of-concept study, dissecting the interplay of ChAHP and CTCF on chromatin. In summary we present a cost-effective, scalable, and customizable target enrichment extension to the existing NOMe-seq protocol allowing genome-scale quantification of nucleosome occupancy and transcription factor binding at single allele resolution.
BackgroundReproductive performance plays an important role in animal welfare, health and profitability in animal husbandry and breeding. It is well established that there is a negative correlation between performance and reproduction in dairy cattle. This relationship is being increasingly considered in breeding programs. By elucidating the genetic architecture of underlying reproduction traits, it will be possible to make a more detailed contribution to this. Our study followed two approaches to elucidate this area; in a first part, variance components were estimated for 14 different calving and fertility traits, and then genome-wide association studies were performed for 13 reproduction traits on imputed sequence-level genotypes with subsequent enrichment analyses.ResultsVariance components analyses showed a low to moderate heritability (h2) for the traits analysed, ranging from 0.014 for endometritis up to 0.271 for stillbirth, indicating variable degrees of variation within the reproduction traits. For genome-wide association studies, we were able to detect genome-wide significant association signals for nine out of 13 analysed traits after Bonferroni correction on chromosome 6, 18 and the X chromosome. In total, we detected over 2700 associated SNPs encircling more than 90 different genes using the imputed whole-genome sequence data. Functional associations were reviewed so far known and potential candidate regions in the proximity of reproduction events were hypothesised.ConclusionOur results confirm previous findings of other authors in a comprehensive cohort including 13 different traits at the same time. Additionally, we identified new candidate genes involved in dairy cattle reproduction and made initial suggestions regarding their potential impact, with special regard to the X chromosome as a putative information source for further research. This work can make a contribution to reveal the genetic architecture of reproduction traits in context of trait specific interactions.
Lumpy skin disease (LSD) is a transboundary viral disease of cattle and water buffaloes caused by the LSD virus, leading to high morbidity, low mortality, and a significant economic impact. Initially endemic to Africa only, LSD has spread to the Middle East, Europe, and Asia in the past decade. The most effective control strategy for LSD is the vaccination of cattle with live-attenuated LSDV vaccines. Consequently, the emergence of two groups of LSDV strains in Asian countries, one closely related to the ancient Kenyan LSDV isolates and the second made of recombinant viruses with a backbone of Neethling-vaccine and field isolates, emphasized the need for constant molecular surveillance. This current study investigated the first outbreak of LSD in Indonesia in 2022. Molecular characterization of the isolate circulating in the country based on selected LSDV-marker genes: RPO30, GPCR, EEV glycoprotein gene, and B22R, as well as whole genome analysis using several analytical tools, indicated the Indonesia LSDV isolate as a recombinant of LSDV_Neethling_vaccine_LW_1959 and LSDV_NI-2490. The analysis clustered the Indonesia_LSDV with the previously reported LSDV recombinants circulating in East and Southeast Asia, but different from the recombinant viruses in Russia and the field isolates in South-Asian countries. Additionally, this study has demonstrated alternative accurate ways of LSDV whole genome analysis and clustering of isolates, including the recombinants, instead of whole-genome phylogenetic tree analysis. These data will strengthen our understanding of the pathogens' origin, the extent of their spread, and determination of suitable control measures required.
Background Muskoxen are important ecosystem components and provide food, economic opportunities, and cultural well-being for Indigenous communities in the Canadian Arctic. Between 2010 and 2021, Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae was isolated from carcasses of muskoxen, caribou, a seal, and an Arctic fox during multiple large scale mortality events in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. A single strain ('Arctic clone') of E. rhusiopathiae was associated with the mortalities on Banks, Victoria and Prince Patrick Islands, Northwest Territories and Nunavut, Canada (2010-2017). The objectives of this study were to (i) characterize the genomes of E. rhusiopathiae isolates obtained from more recent muskox mortalities in the Canadian Arctic in 2019 and 2021; (ii) identify and compare common virulence traits associated with the core genome and mobile genetic elements (i.e. pathogenicity islands and prophages) among Arctic clone versus other E. rhusiopathiae genomes; and iii) use pan-genome wide association studies (GWAS) to determine unique genetic contents of the Arctic clone that may encode virulence traits and that could be used for diagnostic purposes. Results Phylogenetic analyses revealed that the newly sequenced E. rhusiopathiae isolates from Ellesmere Island, Nunavut (2021) also belong to the Arctic clone. Of 17 virulence genes analysed among 28 Arctic clone isolates, four genes - adhesin, rhusiopathiae surface protein-A (rspA), choline binding protein-B (cbpB) and CDP-glycerol glycerophosphotransferase (tagF) - had amino acid sequence variants unique to this clone when compared to 31 other E. rhusiopathiae genomes. These genes encode proteins that facilitate E. rhusiopathiae to attach to the host endothelial cells and form biofilms. GWAS analyses using Scoary found several unique genes to be overrepresented in the Arctic clone. Conclusions The Arctic clone of E. rhusiopathiae was associated with multiple muskox mortalities spanning over a decade and multiple Arctic islands with distances over 1000 km, highlighting the extent of its spatiotemporal spread. This clone possesses unique gene content, as well as amino acid variants in multiple virulence genes that are distinct from the other closely related E. rhusiopathiae isolates. This study establishes an essential foundation on which to investigate whether these differences are correlated with the apparent virulence of this specific clone through in vitro and in vivo studies.
Background The obligate intracellular bacterial family Chlamydiaceae comprises a number of different species that cause disease in various vertebrate hosts including humans. Chlamydia suis, primarily found in the gastrointestinal tract of pigs, is the only species of the Chlamydiaceae family to have naturally gained tetracycline resistance (TetR), through a genomic island (Tet-island), integrated into the middle of chromosomal invasin-like gene inv. Previous studies have hypothesised that the uptake of the Tet-island from a host outside the Chlamydiaceae family was a unique event, followed by spread among C. suis through homologous recombination. In vitro recombination studies have shown that Tet-island exchange between C. suis strains is possible. Our aim in this study was to gain a deeper understanding of the interclade recombination of the Tet-island, among currently circulating C. suis field strains compared to in vitro-generated recombinants, using published whole genome sequences of C. suis field strains (n = 35) and in vitro-generated recombinants (n = 63). Results We found that the phylogeny of inv better reflected the phylogeny of the Tet-island than that of the whole genome, supporting recombination rather than site-specific insertion as the means of transfer. There were considerable differences between the distribution of recombinations within in vitro-generated strains compared to that within the field strains. These differences are likely because in vitro-generated recombinants were selected for a tetracycline and rifamycin/rifampicin resistant background, leading to the largest peak of recombination across the Tet-island. Finally, we found that interclade recombinations across the Tet-island were more variable in length downstream of the Tet-island than upstream. Conclusions Our study supports the hypothesis that the occurrence of TetR strains in both clades of C. suis came about through interclade recombination after a single ancestral horizontal gene transfer event.
Brasenia schreberi, a plant species traditionally utilized in Chinese medicine and cuisine, represents an early evolutionary stage among flowering plants (angiosperms). While the plastid genome of this species has been published, its mitochondrial genome (mitogenome) has not been extensively explored, with a notable absence of thorough comparative analyses of its organellar genomes. In our study, we had assembled the entire mitogenome of B. schreberi utilizing the sequencing data derived from both Illumina platform and Oxford Nanopore. The B. schreberi mitogenome mostly exists as six circular DNA molecules, with the largest being 628,257 base pairs (bp) and the smallest 110,220 bp, amounting to 1.49 megabases (Mb). Then we annotated the mitogenome of B. schreberi. The mitogenome encompasses a total of 71 genes: 40 of these are coding proteins genes (PCGs), 28 are genes for transfer RNA (tRNA), and the remaining 3 are genes for ribosomal RNA (rRNA). In the analysis of codon usage, we noted a unique codon preference specific to each amino acid. The most commonly used codons exhibited an average RSCU of 1.36, indicating a noticeable bias in codon selection. In the repeat sequence analysis, a total of 553 simple sequence repeats (SSRs) were identified, 1,822 dispersed repeats (comprising 1,015 forward and 807 palindromic repeats), and 608 long terminal repeats (LTRs). Additionally, in the analysis of homologous sequences between organelle genomes, we detected 38 homologous sequences derived from the plastid genome, each exceeding 500 bp, within the B. schreberi mitochondrial genome. Notably, ten tRNA genes (trnC-GCA, trnM-CAU, trnI-CAU, trnQ-UUG, trnN-GUU, trnT-GGU, trnW-CCA, trnA-UGC, trnI-GAU, and trnV-GAC) appear to have been completely transferred from the chloroplast to the mitogenome. Utilizing the Deepred-mt to predict the RNA editing sites in the mitogenome, we have identified 675 high-quality RNA editing sites in the 40 mitochondrial PCGs. In the final stage of our study, we performed an analysis of colinearity and inferred the phylogenetic relationship of B. schreberi with other angiosperms, utilizing the mitochondrial PCGs as a basis. The results showed that the non-coding regions of the B. schreberi mitogenome are characterized by an abundance of repetitive sequences and exogenous sequences, and B. schreberi is more closely related with Euryale ferox.
Background The Rh blood group system is characterized by its complexity and polymorphism, encompassing 56 different antigens. Accurately predicting the presence of the C antigen using genotyping methods has been challenging. The objective of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of various genotyping methods for predicting the Rh C and to identify a suitable method for the Chinese Han population. Methods In total, 317 donors, consisting 223 D+ (including 20 with the Del phenotype) and 94 D- were randomly selected. For RHC genotyping, 48C and 109bp insertion were detected on the Real-time PCR platform and -292 substitution was analyzed via restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). Moreover, the promoter region of the RHCE gene was sequenced to search for other nucleotide substitutions between RHC and RHc. Agreement between prediction methods was evaluated using the Kappa statistic, and comparisons between methods were conducted via the chi 2 test. Results The analysis revealed that the 48C allele, 109bp insertion, a specific pattern observed in RFLP results, and wild-type alleles of seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were in strong agreement with the Rh C, with Kappa coefficients exceeding 0.8. However, there were instances of false positives or false negatives (0.6% false negative rate for 109bp insertion and 5.4-8.2% false positive rates for other methods). The 109bp insertion method exhibited the highest accuracy in predicting the Rh C, at 99.4%, compared to other methods (P values <= 0.001). Although no statistical differences were found among other methods for predicting Rh C (P values>0.05), the accuracies in descending order were 48C (94.6%) > rs586178 (92.7%) > rs4649082, rs2375313, rs2281179, rs2072933, rs2072932, and RFLP (92.4%) > rs2072931 (91.8%). Conclusions None of the methods examined can independently and accurately predict the Rh C. However, the 109bp insertion test demonstrated the highest accuracy for predicting the Rh C in the Chinese Han population. Utilizing the 109bp insertion test in combination with other methods may enhance the accuracy of Rh C prediction.
BackgroundHistone acetylation, which is regulated by histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs), plays a crucial role in the control of gene expression. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have shown potential in cancer therapy; however, the specific roles of HDACs in early embryos remain unclear. Moreover, although some pan-HDACi have been used to maintain cellular undifferentiated states in early embryos, the specific mechanisms underlying their effects remain unknown. Thus, there remains a significant knowledge gap regarding the application of selective HDACi in early embryos.ResultsTo address this gap, we treated early embryos with two selective HDACi (MGCD0103 and T247). Subsequently, we collected and analyzed their transcriptome data at different developmental stages. Our findings unveiled a significant effect of HDACi treatment during the crucial 2-cell stage of zygotes, leading to a delay in embryonic development after T247 and an arrest at 2-cell stage after MGCD0103 administration. Furthermore, we elucidated the regulatory targets underlying this arrested embryonic development, which pinpointed the G2/M phase as the potential period of embryonic development arrest caused by MGCD0103. Moreover, our investigation provided a comprehensive profile of the biological processes that are affected by HDACi, with their main effects being predominantly localized in four aspects of zygotic gene activation (ZGA): RNA splicing, cell cycle regulation, autophagy, and transcription factor regulation. By exploring the transcriptional regulation and epigenetic features of the genes affected by HDACi, we made inferences regarding the potential main pathways via which HDACs affect gene expression in early embryos. Notably, Hdac7 exhibited a distinct response, highlighting its potential as a key player in early embryonic development.ConclusionsOur study conducted a comprehensive analysis of the effects of HDACi on early embryonic development at the transcriptional level. The results demonstrated that HDACi significantly affected ZGA in embryos, elucidated the distinct actions of various selective HDACi, and identified specific biological pathways and mechanisms via which these inhibitors modulated early embryonic development.
Background Intramuscular fat content is an important index reflecting the quality of mutton, which directly affects the flavor and tenderness of mutton. Livestock and poultry intramuscular fat content is influenced by genetics, nutritional level, and environmental factors. Key regulatory factors play a crucial role in intramuscular fat deposition. However, there is a limited amount of research on the identification and function of key genes involved in intramuscular fat content deposition specifically in sheep. Results Histological differences in the longest dorsal muscle of the small-tailed frigid sheep increased in diameter and decreased in several muscle fibers with increasing monthly age; The intramuscular fat content of the longest dorsal muscle of the small-tailed cold sheep varied with age, with a minimum of 1 month of age, a maximum of 6 months of age, and a minimum of 12 months of age. Transcriptomic sequencing and bioinformatics analysis revealed a large number of differential genes in the longest dorsal muscles of little-tailed billy goats of different months of age, which were enriched in multiple GO entries and KEGG pathways. Among them, the pathway associated with intramuscular fat was the AMPK signaling pathway, and the related genes were PPARGC1A and ADIPOQ; Immunohistochemical studies showed that PPARGC1A and ADIPOQ proteins were expressed in connective tissues, cell membranes, and, to a lesser extent, the cytoplasm of the longest dorsal muscle of the little-tailed frigid sheep; Real-time PCR and Western Blot validation showed that PPARGC1A and ADIPOQ were both expressed in the longest dorsal muscle of the little-tailed frigid sheep at different ages, and there were age differences in the amount of expression. The ADIPOQ gene was negatively correlated with the intramuscular fat content of the longest dorsal muscle, and the PPARGC1A gene was positively correlated with the intramuscular fat content of the longest dorsal muscle; As inferred from the above results, the ADIPOQ gene was negatively correlated with the intramuscular fat content of the longest dorsal muscle (r = -0.793, P < 0.05); and the PPARGC1A gene was positively correlated with the intramuscular fat content of the longest dorsal muscle r = 0.923, P < 0.05). Conclusions Based on the above results, it can be inferred that the ADIPOQ gene is negatively correlated with the intramuscular fat content of the longest back muscle (r = -0.793, P < 0.05); the PPARGC1A gene is positively correlated with the intramuscular fat content of the longest back muscle (r = 0.923, P < 0.05).
Methylobacterium sp. XJLW converts formaldehyde into methanol and formic acid via a Cannizzaro reaction in response to environmental formaldehyde stress. Methanol is further assimilated without formaldehyde or formic acid formation, whereas formic acid accumulates without undergoing further metabolism. Synthetic biology-based biotransformation of methanol to generate additional products can potentially achieve carbon neutrality. However, practical applications are hampered by limitations such as formaldehyde tolerance. In this study, we aimed to explore the specific mechanism of strain XJLW in response to formaldehyde stress. Thus, a transcriptomic analysis of XJLW under formaldehyde treatment was performed, revealing changes in the expression of specific genes related to one-carbon metabolism. Central metabolic genes were downregulated, whereas metabolic bypass genes were upregulated to maintain methanol assimilation in XJLW's response to formaldehyde treatment. In total, 100 genes potentially related to methyl transfer were identified. The function of only one gene, RS27765, was similar to that of glyA, which encodes a methyltransferase involved in one-carbon metabolism. The double-mutant strain, lacking RS27765 and glyA, lost its ability to grow in methanol, whereas the single-mutant strain, lacking only one of these genes, still grew in methanol. Co-expression of RS27765 and RS31205 (YscQ/HrcQ type III secretion apparatus protein) enabled Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) to effectively degrade methanol. Using protein sequence analysis and molecular docking, we proposed a model wherein RS27765 is necessary for cell growth by using methanol generated via formaldehyde cannizzaro reaction. This process enables direct assimilation of methanol without producing formaldehyde and formic acid as intermediate metabolites. The RS27765 gene cluster, in conjunction with metabolic bypass genes, constitutes a novel auxiliary pathway facilitating formaldehyde stress tolerance in the strain.
Background Salinity is a significant abiotic stress that affects plants from germination through all growth stages. This study was aimed to determine the morpho-physiological and genetic variations in BC1F2, BC2F1 and F-3 generations resulting from the cross combination WH1105 x Kharchia 65. Results A significant reduction in germination percentage was observed under salt stress in BC1F2 and F-3 seeds. Correlation, heritability in the broad sense, phenotypic coefficient of variability (PCV) and genotypic coefficient of variability (GCV) were measured for all traits. The presence of both Nax1 and Nax2 loci was confirmed in twenty-nine plants using the marker-assisted selection technique. Genetic relationships among the populations were assessed using twenty-four polymorphic SSR markers. Conclusion Cluster analysis along with two and three-dimensional PCA scaling (Principal Component Analysis) revealed the distinct nature of WH 1105 and Kharchia 65. Six plants closer to the recurrent parent (WH1105) selected through this study can serve as valuable genetic material for salt-tolerant wheat improvement programs.
Background Dystrophinopathies are the most common X-linked inherited muscle diseases, and the disease-causing gene is DMD. Exonic duplications are a common type of pathogenic variants in the DMD gene, however, 5' end exonic duplications containing exon 1 are less common. When assessing the pathogenicity of exonic duplications in the DMD gene, consideration must be given to their impact on the reading frame. Traditional molecular methods, such as multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and next-generation sequencing (NGS), are commonly used in clinics. However, they cannot discriminate the precise physical locations of breakpoints and structural features of genomic rearrangement. Long-read sequencing (LRS) can effectively overcome this limitation. Results We used LRS technology to perform whole genome sequencing on three families and analyze the structural variations of the DMD gene, which involves the duplications of exon 1 and/or exon 2. Two distinct variant types encompassing exon 1 in the DMD Dp427m isoform and/or Dp427c isoform are identified, which have been infrequently reported previously. In pedigree 1, the male individuals harboring duplication variant of consecutive exons 1-2 in the DMD canonical transcript (Dp427m) and exon 1 in the Dp427c transcript are normal, indicating the variant is likely benign. In pedigree 3, the patient carries complex SVs involving exon 1 of the DMD Dp427c transcript showing an obvious phenotype. The locations of the breakpoints and the characteristics of structural variants (SVs) are identified by LRS, enabling the classification of the variants' pathogenicity. Conclusions Our research sheds light on the complexity of DMD variants encompassing Dp427c/Dp427m promoter regions and emphasizes the importance of cautious interpretation when assessing the pathogenicity of DMD 5' end exonic duplications, particularly in carrier screening scenarios without an affected proband.
Background Salmonella, an important foodborne pathogen, was estimated to be responsible for 95.1 million cases and 50,771 deaths worldwide. Sixteen serovars were responsible for approximately 80% of Salmonella infections in humans in China, and infections caused by a few uncommon serovars have been reported in recent years, though not with S. Welikade. This study reports the first clinical case caused by S. Welikade in China and places Chinese S. Welikade isolates in the context of global isolates via genomic analysis. For comparison, S. Welikade isolates were also screened in the Chinese Local Surveillance System for Salmonella (CLSSS). The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 28 antimicrobial agents were determined using the broth microdilution method. The isolates were sequenced on an Illumina platform to identify antimicrobial resistance genes, virulence genes, and phylogenetic relationships. Results The S. Welikade isolate (Sal097) was isolated from a two-year-old boy with acute gastroenteritis in 2021. Along with the other two isolates found in CLSSS, the three Chinese isolates were susceptible to all the examined antimicrobial agents, and their sequence types (STs) were ST5123 (n = 2) and ST3774 (n = 1). Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based phylogenetic analysis revealed that global S. Welikade strains can be divided into four groups, and these three Chinese isolates were assigned to B (n = 2; Sal097 and XXB1016) and C (n = 1; XXB700). In Group B, the two Chinese ST5123 isolates were closely clustered with three UK ST5123 isolates. In Group C, the Chinese isolate was closely related to the other 12 ST3774 isolates. The number of virulence genes in the S. Welikade isolates ranged from 59 to 152. The galF gene was only present in Group A, the pipB2 gene was only absent from Group A, the avrA gene was only absent from Group B, and the allB, sseK1, sspH2, STM0287, and tlde1 were found only within Group C and D isolates. There were 15 loci unique to the Sal097 isolate. Conclusion This study is the first to characterize and investigate clinical S. Welikade isolates in China. Responsible for a pediatric case of gastroenteritis in 2021, the clinical isolate harbored no antimicrobial resistance and belonged to phylogenetic Group B of global S. Welikade genomes.
Congenital infection caused by vertical transmission of microsporidia N. bombycis can result in severe economic losses in the silkworm-rearing industry. Whole-transcriptome analyses have revealed non-coding RNAs and their regulatory networks in N. bombycis infected embryos and larvae. However, transcriptomic changes in the microsporidia proliferation and host responses in congenitally infected embryos and larvae remains unclear. Here, we simultaneously compared the transcriptomes of N. bombycis and its host B. mori embryos of 5-day and larvae of 1-, 5- and 10-day during congenital infection. For the transcriptome of N. bombycis, a comparison of parasite expression patterns between congenital-infected embryos and larva showed most genes related to parasite central carbon metabolism were down-regulated in larvae during infection, whereas the majority of genes involved in parasite proliferation and growth were up-regulated. Interestingly, a large number of distinct or shared differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were revealed by the Venn diagram and heat map, many of them were connected to infection related factors such as Ricin B lectin, spore wall protein, polar tube protein, and polysaccharide deacetylase. For the transcriptome of B. mori infected with N. bombycis, beyond numerous DEGs related to DNA replication and repair, mRNA surveillance pathway, RNA transport, protein biosynthesis, and proteolysis, with the progression of infection, a large number of DEGs related to immune and infection pathways, including phagocytosis, apoptosis, TNF, Toll-like receptor, NF-kappa B, Fc epsilon RI, and some diseases, were successively identified. In contrast, most genes associated with the insulin signaling pathway, 2-oxacarboxylic acid metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, and lipid metabolisms were up-regulated in larvae compared to those in embryos. Furthermore, dozens of distinct and three shared DEGs that were involved in the epigenetic regulations, such as polycomb, histone-lysine-specific demethylases, and histone-lysine-N-methyltransferases, were identified via the Venn diagram and heat maps. Notably, many DEGs of host and parasite associated with lipid-related metabolisms were verified by RT-qPCR. Taken together, simultaneous transcriptomic analyses of both host and parasite genes lead to a better understanding of changes in the microsporidia proliferation and host responses in embryos and larvae in N. bombycis congenital infection.
Background This study explores the impact of disrupting the circadian clock through a Cycle gene knockout (KO) on the transcriptome of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. The investigation aims to uncover the resulting alterations in gene expression patterns and physiological processes. Results Transcriptome analysis was conducted on Cyc knockout (AeCyc(-/-)) and wild-type mosquitoes at four time points in a light-dark cycle. The study identified system-driven genes that exhibit rhythmic expression independently of the core clock machinery. Cyc disruption led to altered expression of essential clock genes, affecting metabolic processes, signaling pathways, stimulus responses and immune responses. Notably, gene ontology enrichment of odorant binding proteins, indicating the clock's role in sensory perception. The absence of Cyc also impacted various regulation of metabolic and cell cycle processes was observed in all time points. Conclusions The intricate circadian regulation in Ae. aegypti encompasses both core clock-driven and system-driven genes. The KO of Cyc gene instigated extensive gene expression changes, impacting various processes, thereby potentially affecting cellular and metabolic functions, immune responses, and sensory perception. The circadian clock's multifaceted involvement in diverse biological processes, along with its role in the mosquito's daily rhythms, forms a nexus that influences the vector's capacity to transmit diseases. These insights shed light on the circadian clock's role in shaping mosquito biology and behavior, opening new avenues for innovative disease control strategies.
Background Cold is a significant limiting factor in productivity, particularly in northwestern and eastern China. Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinases (CDPKs), a primary calcium signaling sensor in plants, play an important role in their response to cold. Snow lotus (Sasussured involucrata Kar L) is a plant that thrives in harsh climates and grows in northwest China. However, there were no reports on the transcriptome of OE-SikCDPK1 transgenic tobacco in response to cold. Results When exposed to cold stress, OE-SikCDPK1 plants displayed a cold-tolerant phenotype compared to non-transgenic tobacco. Under cold conditions, relative water content reduced, relative conductivity increased, malondialdehyde levels rose, and cold-responsive gene expression increased. The OE-SikCDPK1 gene and non-transgenic tobacco were employed for research purposes. The transcriptome of leaves was sequenced using the HISAT2 sequencing platform, and the data were used to examine gene function annotation and differentially expressed genes (DEGs). 53,022 DEGs in tobacco leaves under cold treatment were obtained. The GO enrichment results revealed that it was enriched for biological-process, defense response and other processes under cold stress. The KEGG pathway enrichment analysis revealed that the metabolic pathways of significant enrichment of DEGs under cold stress mainly involved MAPK signaling pathway transduction. The transcription factor identification results showed that the transcription factors with the largest number of differential expressions under cold treatment were mainly from WRKY, AP2, MYB, bHLH, NAC and other transcription factor families. Conclusion The cold tolerance mechanism of snow lotus SikCDPK1 was comprehensively analyzed at the transcriptional level for the first time using RNA-seq technology. This study demonstrates that SikCDPK1 can respond to cold by participating in the MAPK signaling pathway and regulating the expression levels of transcription factors, including WRKY, AP2, MYB, bHLH, and NAC. These results offer valuable insights for further exploration of the cold tolerance mechanism associated with SikCDPK1.
Quantifying the features of mitochondrial genome structural variation is crucial for understanding its contribution to complexity. Accurate quantification and interpretation of organizational diversity can help uncover biological evolutionary laws and patterns. The current qMGR approach accumulates the changes in two adjacent genes to calculate the rearrangement frequency RF of each single gene and the rearrangement score RS for specific taxa in the mitogenomes of a given taxonomic group. However, it may introduce bias, as it assigns scores to adjacent genes rather than to rearranged genes. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel statistical method called qGO to quantify the diversity of gene organization. The qGO method, which is based on the homology of gene order, provides a more accurate representation of genome organizational diversity by partitioning gene strings and individually assigning weights to genes spanning different regions. Additionally, a comprehensive approach is employed for distance computation, generating an extensive matrix of rearrangement distances. Through experiments on more than 5500 vertebrate mitochondrial genomes, we demonstrated that the qGO method outperforms existing methods in terms of accuracy and interpretability. This method improves the comparability of genomes and allows a more accurate comparison of the diversity of mitochondrial genome organization across taxa. These findings have significant implications for unraveling genome evolution, exploring genome function, and investigating the process of molecular evolution.
BackgroundGlutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a crucial class of plant enzymes, playing pivotal roles in plant growth, development, and stress responses. However, studies on the functions and regulatory mechanisms of GSTs in plants remain relatively limited.ResultsThis study aimed to comprehensively identify and analyze GST proteins in rye. A total of 171 rye GST genes were identified and classified into four subfamilies, Tau, Phi, Theta, and Zeta, based on their sequence similarity and structural features. Notably, genes classified under the Tau subfamily were the most abundant at 118, while only one gene was under the Theta subfamily. Subsequent phylogenetic and collinearity analysis revealed 29 tandem duplications and 6 segmental duplication events. There were 13 collinear genes between rye and wheat, maize, and rice, demonstrating the expansion and evolution of the GST gene family. An analysis of the expression profiles of 20 representative ScGST genes in different tissues and under various environmental stresses was performed to further understand the functions and expression patterns of ScGST genes. The results showed that these genes exhibited the highest expression levels in stems, followed by fruits and leaves.ConclusionsThis study provides a comprehensive identity, classification, and analysis of rye GST genes, which offer valuable insights into the functionality and regulatory mechanisms of the GST gene family in rye. Especially, ScGST39 was identified as a candidate gene because it was significantly upregulated under multiple stress conditions, indicating its potential crucial role in plant stress tolerance mechanisms.
BackgroundDiabetic foot ulcer (DFU) is one of the most common and severe complications of diabetes, with vascular changes, neuropathy, and infections being the primary pathological mechanisms. Glutamine (Gln) metabolism has been found to play a crucial role in diabetes complications. This study aims to identify and validate potential Gln metabolism biomarkers associated with DFU through bioinformatics and machine learning analysis.MethodsWe downloaded two microarray datasets related to DFU patients from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, namely GSE134431, GSE68183, and GSE80178. From the GSE134431 dataset, we obtained differentially expressed Gln-metabolism related genes (deGlnMRGs) between DFU and normal controls. We analyzed the correlation between deGlnMRGs and immune cell infiltration status. We also explored the relationship between GlnMRGs molecular clusters and immune cell infiltration status. Notably, WGCNA to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) within specific clusters. Additionally, we conducted GSVA to annotate enriched genes. Subsequently, we constructed and screened the best machine learning model. Finally, we validated the predictions' accuracy using a nomogram, calibration curves, decision curve analysis (DCA), and the GSE134431, GSE68183, and GSE80178 dataset.ResultsIn both the DFU and normal control groups, we confirmed the presence of deGlnMRGs and an activated immune response. From the GSE134431 dataset, we obtained 20 deGlnMRGs, including CTPS1, NAGS, SLC7A11, GGT1, GCLM, RIMKLA, ARG2, ASL, ASNS, ASNSD1, PPAT, GLS2, GLUD1, MECP2, ASS1, PRODH, CTPS2, ALDH5A1, DGLUCY, and SLC25A12. Furthermore, two clusters were identified in DFU. Immune infiltration analysis indicated the presence of immune heterogeneity in these two clusters. Additionally, we established a Support Vector Machine (SVM) model based on 5 genes (R3HCC1, ZNF562, MFN1, DRAM1, and PTGDS), which exhibited excellent performance on the external validation datasetGSE134431, GSE68183, and GSE80178 (AUC = 0.929).ConclusionThis study has identified five Gln metabolism genes associated with DFU, revealing potential novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets for DFU. Additionally, the infiltration of immune-inflammatory cells plays a crucial role in the progression of DFU.
BackgroundThe Hezuo (HZ) pig, a famous indigenous breed in China, is characterized by precocious puberty compared with foreign-introduced pig breeds. Sexual maturation is a complex physiological process, and in recent years, circular RNAs (circRNAs), a new class of noncoding RNAs with endogenous regulatory functions, have been shown to play important roles in regulating sexual maturation. However, the dynamic expression and regulatory mechanism of circRNAs during sexual maturation in HZ pigs remain unclear. In this study, we performed RNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis to reveal circRNA expression patterns in the testes of HZ boars at 30 days (sexual immaturity; Ha) and 120 days (sexual maturity; Hb), with Landrace (LC) boars of the same age (La and Lb) as controls. Subsequently, an abundant circ_005678 (circPAN3) transcribed from the PAN3 gene, was functionally investigated by RT-qPCR, Western Blot, CCK-8, and flow cytometry.ResultsWe identified 31,134 circRNAs in 12 samples, and 2,562, 2,401, 749, and 831 differentially expressed (DE) circRNAs were identified in the Ha-vs-Hb, La-vs-Lb, Ha-vs-La, and Hb-vs-Lb groups, respectively. The results of functional enrichment analyses indicated that these source genes of the DE circRNAs were involved mainly in testicular development and spermatogenesis. Furthermore, we constructed a circRNA-miRNA-mRNA interaction network and functionally analyzed the target genes. GO functional annotation of the target genes suggested that they were mainly involved in biological processes such as gland development, cell proliferation, and reproduction. KEGG pathway analysis further revealed that these genes were enriched mainly in signaling pathways involved in testicular development and spermatogenesis, including the PI3K-Akt and MAPK signaling pathways. Cellular assays revealed that circPAN3 promoted proliferation and inhibited apoptosis in immature Sertoli cells, whereas opposite changes were observed by circPAN3 knockdown.ConclusionsThis study revealed the dynamic expression profiles and regulatory mechanisms of circRNAs during sexual maturation in HZ pigs. Further functional studies demonstrated that circPAN3 promoted the proliferation and inhibited the apoptosis of immature Sertoli cells, suggesting that circPAN3 may be closely related to the characteristics of precocious puberty in HZ boars. These findings provide a new perspective for exploring the regulatory mechanism of circRNAs in precocious puberty in HZ pigs.
Background Bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) endosperm contains starch and proteins, which determine the final yield, quality, and nutritional value of wheat grain. The preferentially expressed endosperm genes can precisely provide targets in the endosperm for improving wheat grain quality and nutrition using modern bioengineering technologies. However, the genes specifically expressed in developing endosperms remain largely unknown. Results In this study, 315 preferentially expressed endosperm genes (PEEGs) in the spring wheat landrace, Chinese Spring, were screened using data obtained from an open bioinformatics database, which reveals a unique grain reserve deposition process and special signal transduction in a developing wheat endosperm. Furthermore, transcription and accumulation of storage proteins in the wheat cultivar, XC26 were evaluated. The results revealed that 315 PEEG plays a critical role in storage protein fragment deposition and is a potential candidate for modifying grain quality and nutrition. Conclusion These results provide new insights into endosperm development and candidate genes and promoters for improving wheat grain quality through genetic engineering and plant breeding techniques.
Background In the beef industry, bull calves are usually castrated to improve flavor and meat quality; however, this can reduce their growth and slaughter performance. The gut microbiota is known to exert a significant influence on growth and slaughter performance. However, there is a paucity of research investigating the impact of castration on gut microbiota composition and its subsequent effects on slaughter performance and meat flavor.Result The objective of this study was to examine the processes via which castration hinders slaughter productivity and enhances meat quality. Bull and castrated calves were maintained under the same management conditions, and at slaughter, meat quality was assessed, and ileum and epithelial tissue samples were obtained. The research employed metagenomic sequencing and non-targeted metabolomics techniques to investigate the makeup of the microbiota and identify differential metabolites. The findings of this study revealed the Carcass weight and eye muscle area /carcass weight in the bull group were significantly higher than those in the steer group. There were no significant differences in the length, width, and crypt depth of the ileum villi between the two groups. A total of 53 flavor compounds were identified in the two groups of beef, of which 16 were significantly higher in the steer group than in the bull group, and 5 were significantly higher in the bull group than in the steer group. In addition, bacteria, Eukaryota, and virus species were significantly separated between the two groups. The lipid metabolism pathways of alpha-linolenic acid, linoleic acid, and unsaturated fatty acids were significantly enriched in the Steers group. Compared with the steer group, the organic system pathway is significantly enriched in the bull group. The study also found that five metabolites (LPC (0:0/20:3), LPC (20:3/0:0), LPE (0:0/22:5), LPE (22:5/0:0), D-Mannosamine), and three species (s_Cloning_vector_Hsp70_LexA-HP1, s_Bacteroides_Coprophilus_CAG: 333, and s_Clostridium_nexile-CAG: 348) interfere with each other and collectively have a positive impact on the flavor compounds of beef.Conclusions These findings provide a basic understanding that under the same management conditions, castration does indeed reduce the slaughter performance of bulls and improve the flavor of beef. Microorganisms and metabolites contribute to these changes through interactions.
Background Hagfishes are fascinating creatures that typically inhabit the deep sea. The deep sea is characterized by its lack of sunlight, primary productivity, and diminishing biomass with increasing ocean depth. Therefore, hagfishes living in this environment must develop effective survival strategies to adapt to the limited food supply. Deep-sea hagfishes have been observed to survive without food intake for up to one year. In this study, we have assembled a high-quality somatic genome of the deep-sea hagfish (Eptatretus okinoseanus) captured below 1,000 m. We compared the genome of E. okinoseanus with the genomes of inshore hagfish, lampreys, and other related species to investigate the genetic factors underlying the deep-sea hagfish adaptations to the environment. Results The E. okinoseanus somatic genome was estimated to be 1.89 Gb and assembled into 17 pseudochromosomes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that shallow-sea and deep-sea hagfishes diverged approximately 58.8 million years ago. We found Perilipin gene family was significantly expanded in deep sea E. okinoseanus, which promotes triacylglycerol storage. Furthermore, a series of genes involved in fatty acid synthesis and metabolism, blood glucose regulation, and metabolic rate regulation were also expanded, rapid evolution or positive selection, and these changes contribute to their efficiency in energy utilization. Among these genes, the positively selected gene JNK may play an important role in energy metabolism. In addition, the olfactory receptors of the deep-sea hagfish were significantly expanded to 86, and three conserved motifs present only in hagfishes olfactory receptors were identified, which may facilitate the rapid localization of carrion. Conclusions This study provides valuable genomic resources for insights into the survival strategies of deep-sea hagfishes in oligotrophic environments.
BackgroundThe marbling trait of cattle muscles, being a key indicator, played an important role in evaluating beef quality. Two breeds of cattle, namely a high-marbling (Angus) and a low-marbling (Nanyang) one, with their cattle muscles selected as our samples for transcriptome sequencing, were aimed to identify differentially expressed long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and their targets associated with the marbling trait.ResultsTranscriptome sequencing identified 487 and 283 differentially expressed mRNAs and lncRNAs respectively between the high-marbling (Angus) and low-marbling (Nanyang) cattle muscles. Twenty-seven pairs of differentially expressed lncRNAs-mRNAs, including eighteen lncRNAs and eleven target genes, were found to be involved in fat deposition and lipid metabolism. We established a positive correlation between fourteen up-regulated (NONBTAT000849.2, MSTRG.9591.1, NONBTAT031089.1, MSTRG.3720.1, NONBTAT029718.1, NONBTAT004228.2, NONBTAT007494.2, NONBTAT011094.2, NONBTAT015080.2, NONBTAT030943.1, NONBTAT021005.2, NONBTAT021004.2, NONBTAT025985.2, and NONBTAT023845.2) and four down-regulated (NONBTAT000850.2, MSTRG.22188.3, MSTRG.22188.4, and MSTRG.22188.5) lncRNAs and eleven genes related to adiponectin family protein (ADIPOQ), cytochrome P450 family (CYP4V2), 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase family (HACD4), kinesin family (KIF5C), lipin family (LPIN2), perilipin family (PLIN1), prostaglandin family (PTGIS), solute carrier family (SLC16A7, SLC2213, and SLCO4C1), and containing a transmembrane domain protein family (VSTM1).ConclusionsThese candidate genes and lncRNAs can be regarded as being responsible for regulating the marbling trait of cattle. lncRNAs along with the variations in intramuscular fat marbling established a foundation for elucidating the genetic basis of high marbling in cattle.
Background Skeletal muscle development and fat deposition have important effects on meat quality. The study of regulating skeletal muscle development and fat deposition is of great significance in improving the quality of carcass and meat. In the present study, whole transcriptome sequencing (including RNA-Seq and miRNA-Seq) was performed on the longissimus dorsi muscle (LDM) of Jinfen White pigs at 1, 90, and 180 days of age.Results The results showed that a total of 245 differentially expressed miRNAs were screened in any two comparisons, which may be involved in the regulation of myogenesis. Among them, compared with 1-day-old group, miR-22-5p was significantly up-regulated in 90-day-old group and 180-day-old group. Functional studies demonstrated that miR-22-5p inhibited the proliferation and differentiation of porcine skeletal muscle satellite cells (PSCs). Pearson correlation coefficient analysis showed that long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) LOC106505926 and CXXC5 gene had strong negative correlations with miR-22-5p. The LOC106505926 and CXXC5 were proven to promote the proliferation and differentiation of PSCs, as opposed to miR-22-5p. In terms of mechanism, LOC106505926 functions as a molecular sponge of miR-22-5p to modulate the expression of CXXC5, thereby inhibits the differentiation of PSCs. In addition, LOC106505926 regulates the differentiation of porcine preadipocytes through direct binding with FASN.Conclusions Collectively, our results highlight the multifaceted regulatory role of LOC106505926 in controlling skeletal muscle and adipose tissue development in pigs and provide new targets for improving the quality of livestock products by regulating skeletal muscle development and fat deposition.
Background Maedi-visna virus (MVV) is a lentivirus that infects monocyte/macrophage lineage cells in sheep, goats, and wild ruminants and causes pneumonia, mastitis, arthritis, and encephalitis. The immune response to MVV infection is complex, and a complete understanding of its infection and pathogenesis is lacking. This study investigated the in vivo transcriptomic patterns of lung tissues in sheep exposed to MVV using the RNA sequencing technology.Result The results indicated that 2,739 genes were significantly differentially expressed, with 1,643 downregulated genes and 1,096 upregulated genes. Many variables that could be unique to MVV infections were discovered. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that a significant proportion of genes was enriched in terms directly related to the immune system and biological responses to viral infections. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis revealed that the most enriched pathways were related to virus-host cell interactions and inflammatory responses. Numerous immune-related genes, including those encoding several cytokines and interferon regulatory factors, were identified in the protein-protein interaction network of differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The expression of DEGs was evaluated using real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis. CXCL13, CXCL6, CXCL11, CCR1, CXCL8, CXCL9, CXCL10, TNFSF8, TNFRSF8, IL7R, IFN-gamma, CCL2, and MMP9 were upregulated. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to identify the types of immune cells that infiltrated MVV-infected tissues. B cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and macrophages were the most prevalent immune cells correlated with MVV infection in the lungs.Conclusion Overall, the findings of this study provide a comprehensive understanding of the in vivo host response to MVV infection and offer new perspectives on the gene regulatory networks that underlie pathogenesis in natural hosts.
BackgroundThe white-blooded Antarctic icefishes is a representative organism that survive under the stenothermal conditions of the Southern Ocean without the hemoglobin genes. To compensate for inefficient oxygen transport, distinct features such as increased heart size, greater blood volume, and reduced hematocrit density enhance the amount of dissolved oxygen and the velocity of blood flow.ResultsHere, we investigated these unique characteristics by comparing high-quality genomic data between white-blooded and red-blooded fishes and identified the loss of FAAP20, which is implicated in anemia. Although the gene region containing FAAP20 is conserved in notothenioids as shown through collinear analysis, only remnants of FAAP20 persist in several icefish species. Additionally, we observed the loss of SOAT1, which plays a pivotal role in cholesterol metabolism, providing a clue for further investigations into the unique mitochondrial form of the icefish.ConclusionsThe loss of FAAP20, which is known to reduce erythrocyte counts under stress conditions in mice and humans, may provide a clue to understanding the genomic characteristics related to oxygen supply, such as low hematocrit, in Antarctic icefishes.
Background The co-occurrence of C-4 and CAM photosynthesis in a single species seems to be unusual and rare. This is likely due to the difficulty in effectively co-regulating both pathways. Here, we conducted a comparative transcriptomic analysis of leaves and cotyledons of the C-4-like species Sesuvium sesuvioides (Aizoaceae) using RNA-seq. Results When compared to cotyledons, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 4 (PEPC4) and some key C-4 genes were found to be up-regulated in leaves. During the day, the expression of NADP-dependent malic enzyme (NADP-ME) was significantly higher in cotyledons than in leaves. The titratable acidity confirmed higher acidity in the morning than in the previous evening indicating the induction of weak CAM in cotyledons by environmental conditions. Comparison of the leaves of S. sesuvioides (C-4-like) and S. portulacastrum (C-3) revealed that PEPC1 was significantly higher in S. sesuvioides, while PEPC3 and PEPC4 were up-regulated in S. portulacastrum. Finally, potential key regulatory elements involved in the C-4-like and CAM pathways were identified. Conclusions These findings provide a new species in which C-4-like and CAM co-occur and raise the question if this phenomenon is indeed so rare or just hard to detect and probably more common in succulent C-4 lineages.
Adhesins are crucial factors in the virulence of bacterial pathogens such as Escherichia coli. However, to date no resources have been dedicated to the detailed analysis of E. coli adhesins. Here, we provide adhesiomeR software that enables characterization of the complete adhesin repertoire, termed the adhesiome. AdhesiomeR incorporates the most comprehensive database of E. coli adhesins and facilitates an extensive analysis of adhesiome. We demonstrate that adhesiomeR achieves 98% accuracy when compared with experimental analyses. Based on analysis of 15,000 E. coli genomes, we define novel adhesiome profiles and clusters, providing a nomenclature for a unified comparison of E. coli adhesiomes.
BackgroundThe Icelandic horse and Exmoor pony are ancient, native breeds, adapted to harsh environmental conditions and they have both undergone severe historic bottlenecks. However, in modern days, the selection pressures on these breeds differ substantially. The aim of this study was to assess genetic diversity in both breeds through expected (HE) and observed heterozygosity (HO) and effective population size (Ne). Furthermore, we aimed to identify runs of homozygosity (ROH) to estimate and compare genomic inbreeding and signatures of selection in the breeds.ResultsHO was estimated at 0.34 and 0.33 in the Icelandic horse and Exmoor pony, respectively, aligning closely with HE of 0.34 for both breeds. Based on genomic data, the Ne for the last generation was calculated to be 125 individuals for Icelandic horses and 42 for Exmoor ponies. Genomic inbreeding coefficient (FROH) ranged from 0.08 to 0.20 for the Icelandic horse and 0.12 to 0.27 for the Exmoor pony, with the majority of inbreeding attributed to short ROHs in both breeds. Several ROH islands associated with performance were identified in the Icelandic horse, featuring target genes such as DMRT3, DOCK8, EDNRB, SLAIN1, and NEURL1. Shared ROH islands between both breeds were linked to metabolic processes (FOXO1), body size, and the immune system (CYRIB), while private ROH islands in Exmoor ponies were associated with coat colours (ASIP, TBX3, OCA2), immune system (LYG1, LYG2), and fertility (TEX14, SPO11, ADAM20).ConclusionsEvaluations of genetic diversity and inbreeding reveal insights into the evolutionary trajectories of both breeds, highlighting the consequences of population bottlenecks. While the genetic diversity in the Icelandic horse is acceptable, a critically low genetic diversity was estimated for the Exmoor pony, which requires further validation. Identified signatures of selection highlight the differences in the use of the two breeds as well as their adaptive trait similarities. The results provide insight into genomic regions under selection pressure in a gaited performance horse breed and various adaptive traits in small-sized native horse breeds. This understanding contributes to preserving genetic diversity and population health in these equine populations.
BackgroundingStayability, which may be defined as the probability of a cow remaining in the herd until a reference age or at a specific number of calvings, is usually measured late in the animal's life. Thus, if used as selection criteria, it will increase the generation interval and consequently might decrease the annual genetic gain. Measuring stayability at an earlier age could be a reasonable strategy to avoid this problem. In this sense, a better understanding of the genetic architecture of this trait at different ages and/or at different calvings is important. This study was conducted to identify possible regions with major effects on stayability measured considering different numbers of calvings in Nellore cattle as well as pathways that can be involved in its expression throughout the female's productive life.ResultsThe top 10 most important SNP windows explained, on average, 17.60% of the genetic additive variance for stayability, varying between 13.70% (at the eighth calving) and 21% (at the fifth calving). These SNP windows were located on 17 chromosomes (1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 27, and 28), and they harbored a total of 176 annotated genes. The functional analyses of these genes, in general, indicate that the expression of stayability from the second to the sixth calving is mainly affected by genetic factors related to reproductive performance, and nervous and immune systems. At the seventh and eighth calvings, genes and pathways related to animal health, such as density bone and cancer, might be more relevant.ConclusionOur results indicate that part of the target genomic regions in selecting for stayability at earlier ages (from the 2th to the 6th calving) would be different than selecting for this trait at later ages (7th and 8th calvings). While the expression of stayability at earlier ages appeared to be more influenced by genetic factors linked to reproductive performance together with an overall health/immunity, at later ages genetic factors related to an overall animal health gain relevance. These results support that selecting for stayability at earlier ages (perhaps at the second calving) could be applied, having practical implications in breeding programs since it could drastically reduce the generation interval, accelerating the genetic progress.
Background Kefir is a complex microbial community that plays a critical role in the fermentation and production of bioactive peptides, and has health-improving properties. The composition of kefir can vary by geographic localization and weather, and this paper focuses on a Brazilian sample and continues previous work that has successful anti-Alzheimer properties. In this study, we employed shotgun metagenomics and peptidomics approaches to characterize Brazilian kefir further. Results We successfully assembled the novel genome of Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens (LkefirU) and conducted a comprehensive pangenome analysis to compare it with other strains. Furthermore, we performed a peptidome analysis, revealing the presence of bioactive peptides encrypted by L. kefiranofaciens in the Brazilian kefir sample, and utilized in silico prospecting and molecular docking techniques to identify potential anti-Alzheimer peptides, targeting beta-amyloid (fibril and plaque), BACE, and acetylcholinesterase. Through this analysis, we identified two peptides that show promise as compounds with anti-Alzheimer properties. Conclusions These findings not only provide insights into the genome of L. kefiranofaciens but also serve as a promising prototype for the development of novel anti-Alzheimer compounds derived from Brazilian kefir.
BackgroundFlag leaf (FL) and panicle architecture (PA) are critical for increasing rice grain yield as well as production. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) can better understand the genetic pathways behind complex traits like FL and PA.ResultsIn this study, 208 diverse rice germplasms were grown in the field at the Texas A&M AgriLife Research Center at Beaumont, TX, during 2022 and 2023 following Augmented Randomized Complete Block Design. After heading, eight different flag leaf and panicle architecture (FLPA) related traits were measured. GWAS analyses were performed to identify potential genomic regions associated with FLPA traits. A total of 97 quantitative trait loci (QTLs) (48 in 2022 and 49 in 2023) were distributed across all 12 chromosomes. GWAS revealed four QTLs (qSBPP4-2, qFLW6-2, qGNPP9, and qGWPP2-3) with phenotypic variation ranging from 11.7 to 22.3%. Two genetic loci were identified as multi-trait QTLs, i.e., S04_32100268 (qFLL4-1 and qFLA4-1) and S04_11552936 (qFLW4 and qFLA4-2) during 2022 and 2023, respectively. Additionally, these loci were further utilized to analyze candidate genes, and 65 genes were predicted in the 100-kb genomic region upstream and downstream. In silico expression analysis revealed 15 genes were expressed during the reproductive stage. These genes were associated with protein kinase, heat shock transcription factor family, sugar transporter conserved site and transcription factor bHLH95- like basic helix-loop-helix domain protein, as well as those that regulate the FLPA-related traits. Os04g0631100 was identified as a potential candidate gene that is highly expressed during the endosperm development stage, and it is associated with an important sugar transporter protein that will be helpful in grain improvement.ConclusionGWAS results revealed four major and two multi-trait QTLs. Expanding their candidate genes, and expression analysis provide the genetic information for molecular improvement of the FLPA-related trait in rice breeding programs.
Lichen-forming fungi (LFF) are prolific producers of functionally and structurally diverse secondary metabolites, most of which are taxonomically exclusive and play lineage-specific roles. To date, widely distributed, evolutionarily conserved biosynthetic pathways in LFF are not known. However, this idea stems from polyketide derivatives, since most biochemical research on lichens has concentrated on polyketide synthases (PKSs). Here, we present the first systematic identification and comparison of terpene biosynthetic genes of LFF using all the available Lecanoromycete reference genomes and 22 de novo sequenced ones (111 in total, representing 60 genera and 23 families). We implemented genome mining and gene networking approaches to identify and group the biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) into networks of similar BGCs. Our large-scale analysis led to the identification of 724 terpene BGCs with varying degrees of pairwise similarity. Most BGCs in the dataset were unique with no similarity to a previously known fungal or bacterial BGC or among each other. Remarkably, we found two BGCs that were widely distributed in LFF. Interestingly, both conserved BGCs contain the same core gene, i.e., putatively a squalene/phytoene synthase (SQS), involved in sterol biosynthesis. This indicates that early gene duplications, followed by gene losses/gains and gene rearrangement are the major evolutionary factors shaping the composition of these widely distributed SQS BGCs across LFF. We provide an in-depth overview of these BGCs, including the transmembrane, conserved, variable and LFF-specific regions. Our study revealed that lichenized fungi do have a highly conserved BGC, providing the first evidence that a biosynthetic gene may constitute essential genes in lichens.
Mustard is a commercial oilseed crop worldwide infected by a highly infectious turnip mosaic virus (TuMV). In the experimental field at ICAR-IARI, New Delhi, in 2022, a 100% incidence of TuMV infection was observed in brown, black and yellow mustard. A very low aphid population suggested the possibility of seed transmission. Earlier, the virus genome was characterized by high throughput sequencing and it was a recombinant of World-B and Asian-BR isolates. The presence of TuMV in immature seeds was confirmed in eight field-grown genotypes via RT-PCR using CP-specific primers designed from the same genome sequence. TuMV was found to be localized in embryo and cotyledon, indicating its true seed-borne nature. Presence of TuMV was also confirmed by RT-PCR in the grow out plants from seeds of field grown eight infected genotypes and 9 genotypes collected from seed stock, that were grown in an aphid-free growth chamber. Further, out of 24 seedlings of Pusa Gold (seed stock) and Pusa Karishma (seeds from field grown plants), 20 and 17 seedlings were found infected with TuMV, respectively. The internally seed-borne nature of the virus leads to its early establishment at the seedling stage, leading to stunting and leaf-puckering symptoms in the progeny plants. This study is the first evidence of seed embryo infection and seedling transmission of TuMV of all the three species of mustard plants (brown, black and yellow mustard). Seed transmission of TuMV in mustard genotypes have implications for the seed exchange programme of mustard seeds.
Background Multiheme cytochromes c (MHC) provide prokaryotes with a broad metabolic versatility that contributes to their role in the biogeochemical cycling of the elements and in energy production in bioelectrochemical systems. However, MHC have only been isolated and studied in detail from a limited number of species. Among these, Desulfuromonadia spp. are particularly MHC-rich. To obtain a broad view of the diversity of MHC, we employed bioinformatic tools to study the cytochromome encoded in the genomes of the Desulfuromonadia class. Results We found that the distribution of the MHC families follows a different pattern between the two orders of the Desulfuromonadia class and that there is great diversity in the number of heme-binding motifs in MHC. However, the vast majority of MHC have up to 12 heme-binding motifs. MHC predicted to be extracellular are the least conserved and show high diversity, whereas inner membrane MHC are well conserved and show lower diversity. Although the most prevalent MHC have homologues already characterized, nearly half of the MHC families in the Desulforomonadia class have no known characterized homologues. AlphaFold2 was employed to predict their 3D structures. This provides an atlas of novel MHC, including examples with high beta-sheet content and nanowire MHC with unprecedented high numbers of putative heme cofactors per polypeptide. Conclusions This work illuminates for the first time the universe of experimentally uncharacterized cytochromes that are likely to contribute to the metabolic versatility and to the fitness of Desulfuromonadia in diverse environmental conditions and to drive biotechnological applications of these organisms.
BackgroundZoonotic human tuberculosis (TB) caused by Mycobacterium bovis (M. bovis) is as vital as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, however with scarce available information. We aimed to use whole-genome sequencing (WGS) technology to take a deep insight into the circulating genotypes of human M. bovis and the genomic characteristics underlying virulence and drug resistance.MethodsThe study included smear positive Ziehl-Neelsen samples from patients with suspected tuberculosis. Samples were cultured on Lowenstein-Jensen media and suspected colonies of M. bovis were selected to undergo DNA extraction and WGS. Data was analysed using the Bacterial and Viral Bioinformatics Resource Center (BV-BRC), and online bioinformatics tools. A phylogenetic tree was constructed for our sequenced strains, in addition to a set of 59 previously sequenced M. bovis genomes from different hosts and countries.ResultsOut of total 112 mycobacterial positive cultures, five M. bovis were isolated and underwent WGS. All sequenced strains belonged to Mycobacterium tuberculosis var bovis, spoligotype BOV_1; BOV_11. Resistance gene mutations were determined in 100% of strains to pyrazinamide (pncA and rpsA), isoniazid (KatG and ahpC), ethambutol (embB, embC, embR and ubiA), streptomycin (rpsl) and fluoroquinolones (gyrA and gyrB). Rifampin (rpoB and rpoC) and delamanid (fbiC) resistance genes were found in 80% of strains. The major represented virulence classes were the secretion system, cell surface components and regulation system. The phylogenetic analysis revealed close genetic relatedness of three sequenced M. bovis strains to previous reported cow strains from Egypt and human strains from France, as well as relatedness of one M. bovis strain to four human Algerian strains. One sequenced strain was related to one cow strain from Egypt and a human strain from South Africa.ConclusionsAll sequenced M. bovis isolates showed the same spoligotype, but diverse phylogeny. Resistance gene mutations were detected for anti-TB drugs including pyrazinamide, isoniazid, streptomycin, ethambutol, fluoroquinolones, cycloserine, rifampin and delamanid. The virulence profile comprised genes assigned mainly to secretion system, cell surface components and regulation system. Phylogenetic analysis revealed genetic relatedness between our isolates and previously sequenced bovine strains from Egypt as well as human strains from other nearby countries in the region.
Hb H disease is the most severe form of alpha-thalassemia compatible with post-natal life. Compound heterozygous alpha 0-thalassemia- SEA deletion/alpha+-thalassemia- 3.7kb deletion is the commonest cause of Hb H disease in Thailand. Preimplantation genetics testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M) is an alternative for couples at risk of the disorder to begin a pregnancy with a healthy baby. This study aims to develop a novel PCR protocol for PGT-M of Hb H disease- SEA/-3.7kb using multiplex fluorescent PCR. A novel set of primers for alpha+-thalassemia- 3.7kb deletion was developed and tested. The PCR protocol for alpha 0-thalassemia- SEA deletion was combined for Hb H disease- SEA/-3.7kb genotyping. The PCR protocols were applied to genomic DNA extracted from subjects with different thalassemia genotypes and on whole genome amplification (WGA) products from clinical PGT-M cycles of the families at risk of Hb Bart's. The results were compared and discussed. The results showed three PCR products from alpha+-thalassemia- 3.7kb primer set, and three from alpha 0thalassemiaSEA primer set. The results were consistent with the known thalassemia genotypes. The novel -alpha 3.7 primers protocol was also tested on 37 WGA products from clinical PGT-M cycles giving accurate genotyping results and a satisfying amplification efficiency with the ADO rates of 2.7%, 0%, and 0% for HBA2, HBA1, and internal control fragments, respectively. This novel PCR protocol can precisely distinguish Hb H disease- SEA/-3.7kb from other genotypes. Additionally, this is the first PCR protocol for Hb H disease- SEA/-3.7kb which is optimal for PGT-M.
Background Coal-burning fluorosis is a chronic poisoning resulting from the prolonged use of locally available high-fluoride coal for heating and cooking. Prolonged fluoride exposure has been demonstrated to decrease PPARGC1A levels. Therefore, this case-control aims to evaluate the genetic association of PPARGC1A gene polymorphisms and methylation of the mitochondrial D-loop region with coal-burning fluorosis. Result The results showed that the TT genotype at rs13131226 and the AA genotype at rs1873532 increased the risk of coal-burning fluorosis (OR = 1.84, P = 0.004; OR = 1.97, P = 0.007), the CT and CC genotypes at rs7665116 decreased the risk of coal-burning fluorosis (OR = 0.54, P = 0.003). The TT genotype at the rs2970847 site and the AA genotype at the rs2970870 site increase the risk of developing skeletal fluorosis (OR = 4.12, P = 0.003; OR = 2.22, P = 0.011). Haplotype AG constructed by rs3736265-rs1873532 increased the risk of the prevalence of coal-burning fluorosis (OR = 1.465, P = 0.005); CG decreased the risk of the prevalence of coal-burning fluorosis (OR = 0.726, P = 0.020). Haplotype CGGT constructed by rs6821591-rs768695-rs3736265-rs2970847 increased the risk of the prevalence of skeletal fluorosis (OR = 1.558, P = 0.027). A 1% increase in CpG_4 methylation levels in the mtDNA D-loop region is associated with a 2.3% increase in the risk of coal-burning fluorosis. Additionally. There was a significant interaction between rs13131226 and rs1873532; CpG_4 and CpG_8.9; rs13131224,rs6821591 and rs7665116 were observed in the occurrence of fluorosis in the Guizhou population (chi(2) = 16.917, P < 0.001; chi(2) = 21.198, P < 0.001; chi(2) = 36.078, P < 0.001). Conclusion PPARGC1A polymorphisms rs13131226 and rs1873532 and the mitochondrial DNA D-loop methylation site CpG_4 have been associated with an increased risk of fluorosis, conversely polymorphism rs7665116 was associated with a decreased risk of fluorosis. Polymorphisms rs2970870 were associated with increased risk of skeletal fluorosis, and polymorphism rs2970847 was associated with decreased risk of skeletal fluorosis. These SNPs and CpG can be used as potential targets to assess fluorosis risk.
Brassinosteroids (BRs), one of the major classes of phytohormones are essential for various processes of plant growth, development, and adaptations to biotic and abiotic stresses. In Arabidopsis, AtCYP90D1 acts as a bifunctional cytochrome P450 monooxygenase, catalyzing C-23 hydroxylation in the brassinolide biosynthetic pathway. The present study reports the functional characterizations of PtoCYP90D1, one of the AtCYP90D1 homologous genes from Populus tomentosa. The qRT-PCR analysis showed that PtoCYP90D1 was highly expressed in roots and old leaves. Overexpression of PtoCYP90D1 (PtoCYP90D1-OE) in poplar promoted growth and biomass yield, as well as increased xylem area and cell layers. Transgenic plants exhibited a significant increase in plant height and stem diameter as compared to the wild type. In contrast, the CRISPR/Cas9-generated mutation of PtoCYP90D1 (PtoCYP90D1-KO) resulted in significantly decreased biomass production in transgenic plants. Further studies revealed that cell wall components increased significantly in PtoCYP90D1-OE lines but not in PtoCYP90D1-KO lines, as compared to wild-type plants. Overall, the findings indicate a positive role of PtoCYP90D1 in improving growth rate and elevating biomass production in poplar, which will have positive implications for its versatile industrial or agricultural applications.
Background Vitamin A and retinoic acid (RA, a metabolite of vitamin A), are inextricably involved to the development of skeletal muscle in animals. However, the mechanisms regulating skeletal muscle development by vitamin A remain poorly reported. The current study designed to investigate the underlying mechanism of vitamin A affecting myogenic differentiation of lamb myoblasts through transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) and gene function validation experiments. It provides a theoretical basis for elucidating the regulation of vitamin A on skeletal muscle development as well as for improving the economic benefits of the mutton sheep industry. Results Newborn lambs were injected with 7,500 IU vitamin A, and longissimus dorsi (LD) muscle tissue was surgically sampled for RNA-Seq analysis and primary myoblasts isolation at 3 weeks of age. The results showed that a total of 14 down-regulated and 3 up-regulated genes, were identified between control and vitamin A groups. Among them, BHLHE40 expression was upregulated in vitamin A group lambs. Furthermore, BHLHE40 expression is significantly increased after initiation of differentiation in myoblasts, and RA addition during differentiation greatly promoted BHLHE40 mRNA expression. In vitro, RA inhibited myoblasts proliferation and promoted myoblasts myogenic differentiation through BHLHE40. Moreover, BHLHE40 was proved to inhibit the expression of the DNA binding inhibitor 3 (ID3), and meanwhile, ID3 could effectively promote myoblasts proliferation and inhibit myoblasts myogenic differentiation. Conclusions Taken together, our results suggested that vitamin A inhibited myoblasts proliferation and promoted myoblasts myogenic differentiation by inhibiting ID3 expression through BHLHE40.
Background The crossbreeding of specialized beef cattle breeds with Chinese indigenous cattle is a common method of genetic improvement. Xia'nan cattle, a crossbreed of Charolais and Nanyang cattle, is China's first specialized beef cattle breed with independent intellectual property rights. After more than two decades of selective breeding, Xia'nan cattle exhibit a robust physique, good environmental adaptability, good tolerance to coarse feed, and high meat production rates. This study analyzed the population genetic structure, genetic diversity, and genomic variations of Xia'nan cattle using whole-genome sequencing data from 30 Xia'nan cattle and 178 published cattle genomic data.Result The ancestry estimating composition analysis showed that the ancestry proportions for Xia'nan cattle were mainly Charolais with a small amount of Nanyang cattle. Through the genetic diversity studies (nucleotide diversity and linkage disequilibrium decay), we found that the genomic diversity of Xia'nan cattle is higher than that of specialized beef cattle breeds in Europe but lower than that of Chinese native cattle. Then, we used four methods to detect genome candidate regions influencing the excellent traits of Xia'nan cattle. Among the detected results, 42 genes (theta pi and CLR) and 131 genes (F ST and XP-EHH) were detected by two different detection strategies. In addition, we found a region in BTA8 with strong selection signals. Finally, we conducted functional annotation on the detected genes and found that these genes may influence body development (NR6A1), meat quality traits (MCCC1), growth traits (WSCD1, TMEM68, MFN1, NCKAP5), and immunity (IL11RA, CNTFR, CCL27, SLAMF1, SLAMF7, NAA35, and GOLM1).Conclusion We elucidated the genomic features and population structure of Xia'nan cattle and detected some selection signals in genomic regions potentially associated with crucial economic traits in Xia'nan cattle. This research provided a basis for further breeding improvements in Xia'nan cattle and served as a reference for genetic enhancements in other crossbreed cattle.
Background Jilin white goose is an excellent local breed in China, with a high annual egg production and laying eggs mainly from February to July each year. The testis, as the only organ that can produce sperm, can affect the sexual maturity and fecundity of male animals. Its growth and development are affected and regulated by a variety of factors. Proteomics is generally applied to identify and quantify proteins in cells and tissues in order to understand the physiological or pathological changes that occur in tissues or cells under specific conditions. Currently, the female poultry reproductive system has been extensively studied, while few related studies focusing on the regulatory mechanism of the reproductive system of male poultry have been conducted.Results A total of 1753 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were generated in which there were 594, 391 and 768 different proteins showing differential expression in three stages, Initial of Laying Cycle (ILC), Peak of Laying Cycle (PLC) and End of Laying Cycle (ELC). Furthermore, bioinformatics was used to analyze the DEPs. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment, Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis were adopted. All DEPs were found to be implicated in multiple biological processes and pathways associated with testicular development, such as renin secretion, Lysosomes, SNARE interactions in vesicle trafficking, the p53 signaling pathway and pathways related to metabolism. Additionally, the reliability of transcriptome results was verified by real-time quantitative PCR by selecting the transcript abundance of 6 selected DEPs at the three stages of the laying cycle.Conclusions The funding in this study will provide critical insight into the complex molecular mechanisms and breeding practices underlying the developmental characteristics of testicles in Jilin white goose.
Background Staphylococcus shinii appears as an umbrella species encompassing several strains of Staphylococcus pseudoxylosus and Staphylococcus xylosus. Given its phylogenetic closeness to S. xylosus, S. shinii can be found in similar ecological niches, including the microbiota of fermented meats where the species may contribute to colour and flavour development. In addition to these conventional functionalities, a biopreservation potential based on the production of antagonistic compounds may be available. Such potential, however, remains largely unexplored in contrast to the large body of research that is available on the biopreservative properties of lactic acid bacteria. The present study outlines the exploration of the genetic basis of competitiveness and antimicrobial activity of a fermented meat isolate, S. shinii IMDO-S216. To this end, its genome was sequenced, de novo assembled, and annotated. Results The genome contained a single circular chromosome and eight plasmid replicons. Focus of the genomic exploration was on secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters coding for ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides. One complete cluster was coding for a bacteriocin, namely lactococcin 972; the genes coding for the pre-bacteriocin, the ATP-binding cassette transporter, and the immunity protein were also identified. Five other complete clusters were identified, possibly functioning as competitiveness factors. These clusters were found to be involved in various responses such as membrane fluidity, iron intake from the medium, a quorum sensing system, and decreased sensitivity to antimicrobial peptides and competing microorganisms. The presence of these clusters was equally studied among a selection of multiple Staphylococcus species to assess their prevalence in closely-related organisms. Conclusions Such factors possibly translate in an improved adaptation and competitiveness of S. shinii IMDO-S216 which are, in turn, likely to improve its fitness in a fermented meat matrix.
BackgroundWheat streak mosaic virus (WSMV) and Triticum mosaic virus (TriMV) are components of the wheat streak mosaic virus disease complex in the Great Plains region of the U.S.A. and elsewhere. Co-infection of wheat with WSMV and TriMV causes synergistic interaction with more severe disease symptoms compared to single infections. Plants are equipped with multiple antiviral mechanisms, of which regulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) is a potentially effective constituent. In this investigation, we have analyzed the total and relative expression of miRNA transcriptome in two wheat cultivars, Arapahoe (susceptible) and Mace (temperature-sensitive-resistant), that were mock-inoculated or inoculated with WSMV, TriMV, or both at 18 degrees C and 27 degrees C.ResultsOur results showed that the most abundant miRNA family among all the treatments was miRNA166, followed by 159a and 168a, although the order of the latter two changed depending on the infections. When comparing infected and control groups, twenty miRNAs showed significant upregulation, while eight miRNAs were significantly downregulated. Among them, miRNAs 9670-3p, 397-5p, and 5384-3p exhibited the most significant upregulation, whereas miRNAs 319, 9773, and 9774 were the most downregulated. The comparison of infection versus the control group for the cultivar Mace showed temperature-dependent regulation of these miRNAs. The principal component analysis confirmed that less abundant miRNAs among differentially expressed miRNAs were strongly correlated with the inoculated symptomatic wheat cultivars. Notably, miRNAs 397-5p, 398, and 9670-3p were upregulated in response to WSMV and TriMV infections, an observation not yet reported in this context. The significant upregulation of these three miRNAs was further confirmed with RT-qPCR analysis; in general, the RT-qPCR results were in agreement with our computational analysis. Target prediction analysis showed that the miRNAs standing out in our analysis targeted genes involved in defense response and regulation of transcription.ConclusionInvestigation into the roles of these miRNAs and their corresponding targets holds promise for advancing our understanding of the mechanisms of virus infection and possible manipulation of these factors for developing durable virus resistance in crop plants.
Background Liver transplantation is an effective treatment for liver failure. There is a large unmet demand, even as not all donated livers are transplanted. The clinical selection criteria for donor livers based on histopathological evaluation and liver function tests are variable. We integrated transcriptomics and histopathology to characterize donor liver biopsies obtained at the time of organ recovery. We performed RNA sequencing as well as manual and artificial intelligence-based histopathology (10 accepted and 21 rejected for transplantation).Results We identified two transcriptomically distinct rejected subsets (termed rejected-1 and rejected-2), where rejected-2 exhibited a near-complete transcriptomic overlap with the accepted livers, suggesting acceptability from a molecular standpoint. Liver metabolic functional genes were similarly upregulated, and extracellular matrix genes were similarly downregulated in the accepted and rejected-2 groups compared to rejected-1. The transcriptomic pattern of the rejected-2 subset was enriched for a gene expression signature of graft success post-transplantation. Serum AST, ALT, and total bilirubin levels showed similar overlapping patterns. Additional histopathological filtering identified cases with borderline scores and extensive molecular overlap with accepted donor livers.Conclusions Our integrated approach identified a subset of rejected donor livers that are likely suitable for transplantation, demonstrating the potential to expand the pool of transplantable livers.
The Microcystis mobilome is a well-known but understudied component of this bloom-forming cyanobacterium. Through genomic and transcriptomic comparisons, we found five families of transposases that altered the expression of genes in the well-studied toxigenic type-strain, Microcystis aeruginosa PCC 7086, and a non-toxigenic genetic mutant, Microcystis aeruginosa PCC 7806 Delta mcyB. Since its creation in 1997, the Delta mcyB strain has been used in comparative physiology studies against the wildtype strain by research labs throughout the world. Some differences in gene expression between what were thought to be otherwise genetically identical strains have appeared due to insertion events in both intra- and intergenic regions. In our Delta mcyB isolate, a sulfate transporter gene cluster (sbp-cysTWA) showed differential expression from the wildtype, which may have been caused by the insertion of a miniature inverted repeat transposable element (MITE) in the sulfate-binding protein gene (sbp). Differences in growth in sulfate-limited media also were also observed between the two isolates. This paper highlights how Microcystis strains continue to "evolve" in lab conditions and illustrates the importance of insertion sequences / transposable elements in shaping genomic and physiological differences between Microcystis strains thought otherwise identical. This study forces the necessity of knowing the complete genetic background of isolates in comparative physiological experiments, to facilitate the correct conclusions (and caveats) from experiments.
Modern broiler breeds allow for high feed efficiency and rapid growth, which come at a cost of increased susceptibility to pathogens and disease. Broiler growth rate, feed efficiency, and health are affected by the composition of the gut microbiota, which in turn is influenced by diet. In this study, we therefore assessed how diet composition can affect the broiler jejunal gut microbiota. A total of 96 broiler chickens were divided into four diet groups: control, coated butyrate supplementation, medium-chain fatty acid supplementation, or a high-fibre low-protein content. Diet groups were sub-divided into age groups (4, 12 and 33 days of age) resulting in groups of 8 broilers per diet per age. The jejunum content was used for metagenomic shotgun sequencing to determine the microbiota taxonomic composition at species level. The composed diets resulted in a total of 104 differentially abundant bacterial species. Most notably were the butyrate-induced changes in the jejunal microbiota of broilers 4 days post-hatch, resulting in the reduced relative abundance of mainly Enterococcus faecium (-1.8 l2fc, P-adj = 9.9E-05) and the opportunistic pathogen Enterococcus hirae (-2.9 l2fc, P-adj = 2.7E-08), when compared to the control diet. This effect takes place during early broiler development, which is critical for broiler health, thus exemplifying the importance of how diet can influence the microbiota composition in relation to broiler health. Future studies should therefore elucidate how diet can be used to promote a beneficial microbiota in the early stages of broiler development.
BackgroundThe possibility of recovering metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) from sequence reads allows for further insights into microbial communities and their members, possibly even analyzing such sequences with tools designed for single-isolate genomes. As result quality depends on sequence quality, performance of tools for single-isolate genomes on MAGs should be tested beforehand. Bioinformatics can be leveraged to quickly create varied synthetic test sets with known composition for this purpose.ResultsWe present MAGICIAN, a flexible, user-friendly pipeline for the simulation of MAGs. MAGICIAN combines a synthetic metagenome simulator with a metagenomic assembly and binning pipeline to simulate MAGs based on user-supplied input genomes, allowing users to test performance of tools on MAGs while having a ground truth to compare results to. Using MAGICIAN, we found that even very slight (1%) changes in depth of coverage can drastically affect whether a genome can be recovered. We also demonstrate the use of simulated MAGs by evaluating the suitability of such genomes obtained with MAGICIAN's current default pipeline for analysis with the antimicrobial resistance gene identification tool ResFinder.ConclusionsUsing MAGICIAN, it is possible to simulate MAGs which, while generally high in quality, reflect issues encountered with real-world data, thus providing realistic best-case data. Evaluating the results of ResFinder analysis of these genomes revealed a risk for plausible-looking false positives, which underlines the need for pipeline validation so that researchers are aware of the potential issues when interpreting real-world data. Furthermore, the effects of fluctuations in depth of coverage on genome recovery in our simulated "random sequencing" warrant further investigation and indicate random subsampling of reads may affect discovery of more genomes.
Background During mitosis the cell depends on proper attachment and segregation of replicated chromosomes to generate two identical progeny. In cancers defined by overexpression or dysregulation of the MYC oncogene this process becomes impaired, leading to genomic instability and tumor evolution. Recently it was discovered that the chromatin regulator WDR5-a critical MYC cofactor-regulates expression of genes needed in mitosis through a direct interaction with the master kinase PDPK1. However, whether PDPK1 and WDR5 contribute to similar mitotic gene regulation in MYC-overexpressing cancers remains unclear. Therefore, to characterize the influence of WDR5 and PDPK1 on mitotic gene expression in cells with high MYC levels, we performed a comparative transcriptomic analysis in neuroblastoma cell lines defined by MYCN-amplification, which results in high cellular levels of the N-MYC protein.Results Using RNA-seq analysis, we identify the genes regulated by N-MYC and PDPK1 in multiple engineered CHP-134 neuroblastoma cell lines and compare them to previously published gene expression data collected in CHP-134 cells following inhibition of WDR5. We find that as expected N-MYC regulates a multitude of genes, including those related to mitosis, but that PDPK1 regulates specific sets of genes involved in development, signaling, and mitosis. Analysis of N-MYC- and PDPK1-regulated genes reveals a small group of commonly controlled genes associated with spindle pole formation and chromosome segregation, which overlap with genes that are also regulated by WDR5. We also find that N-MYC physically interacts with PDPK1 through the WDR5-PDPK1 interaction suggesting regulation of mitotic gene expression may be achieved through a N-MYC-WDR5-PDPK1 nexus.Conclusions Overall, we identify a small group of genes highly enriched within functional gene categories related to mitotic processes that are commonly regulated by N-MYC, WDR5, and PDPK1 and suggest that a tripartite interaction between the three regulators may be responsible for setting the level of mitotic gene regulation in N-MYC amplified cell lines. This study provides a foundation for future studies to determine the exact mechanism by which N-MYC, WDR5, and PDPK1 converge on cell cycle related processes.
Eastern oysters, Crassostrea virginica, are historically a keystone species in many of the estuaries in which they reside, providing critical ecosystem services. Because oyster populations have been on the decline for the past century, restoration initiatives currently are underway in many estuarine systems, including Great Bay Estuary (GBE), New Hampshire. Results of prior studies of eastern oyster population genomics cannot be applied directly to GBE, as it is a well-mixed estuarine system that is relatively contained, and the sources of recruits are split among cultivated and native. This study aimed to identify the population genomic structure of eastern oysters in GBE to facilitate determination of effective population size and estimation of genetic differentiation among subpopulations. Results showed moderate genomic differentiation among native, cultivated, and restoration C. virginica subpopulations in the Bay. A small number of breeders (Ne=163-276) was found in all subpopulations except the Lamprey River site (Ne=995). This research provides a contemporary snapshot of eastern oyster subpopulation structure at the genomic level in GBE that will facilitate restoration and enhanced management.
BackgroundGrowth differentiation factor 11 (GDF11) is a member of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily that has gained considerable attention over the last decade for its observed ability to reverse age-related deterioration of multiple tissues, including the heart. Yet as many researchers have struggled to confirm the cardioprotective and anti-aging effects of GDF11, the topic has grown increasingly controversial, and the field has reached an impasse. We postulated that a clearer understanding of GDF11 could be gained by investigating its health effects at the population level.Methods and resultsWe employed a comprehensive strategy to interrogate results from genome-wide association studies in population Biobanks. Interestingly, phenome-wide association studies (PheWAS) of GDF11 tissue-specific cis-eQTLs revealed associations with asthma, immune function, lung function, and thyroid phenotypes. Furthermore, PheWAS of GDF11 genetic variants confirmed these results, revealing similar associations with asthma, immune function, lung function, and thyroid health. To complement these findings, we mined results from transcriptome-wide association studies, which uncovered associations between predicted tissue-specific GDF11 expression and the same health effects identified from PheWAS analyses.ConclusionsIn this study, we report novel relationships between GDF11 and disease, namely asthma and hypothyroidism, in contrast to its formerly assumed role as a rejuvenating factor in basic aging and cardiovascular health. We propose that these associations are mediated through the involvement of GDF11 in inflammatory signaling pathways. Taken together, these findings provide new insights into the health effects of GDF11 at the population level and warrant future studies investigating the role of GDF11 in these specific health conditions.
BackgroundThe human pancreas is composed of specialized cell types producing hormones and enzymes critical to human health. These specialized functions are the result of cell type-specific transcriptional programs which manifest in cell-specific gene expression. Understanding these programs is essential to developing therapies for pancreatic disorders. Transcription in the human pancreas has been widely studied by single-cell RNA technologies, however the diversity of protocols and analysis methods hinders their interpretability in the aggregate.ResultsIn this work, we perform a meta-analysis of pancreatic single-cell RNA sequencing data. We present a database for reference transcriptome abundances and cell-type specificity metrics. This database facilitates the identification and definition of marker genes within the pancreas. Additionally, we introduce a versatile tool which is freely available as an R package, and should permit integration into existing workflows. Our tool accepts count data files generated by widely-used single-cell gene expression platforms in their original format, eliminating an additional pre-formatting step. Although we designed it to calculate expression specificity of pancreas cell types, our tool is agnostic to the biological source of count data, extending its applicability to other biological systems.ConclusionsOur findings enhance the current understanding of expression specificity within the pancreas, surpassing previous work in terms of scope and detail. Furthermore, our database and tool enable researchers to perform similar calculations in diverse biological systems, expanding the applicability of marker gene identification and facilitating comparative analyses.
BackgroundThe salmon louse (Lepeophtheirus salmonis) is a parasite of wild and farmed salmonid fish, causing huge economic damage to the commercial farming of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) in the northern hemisphere. The avermectin emamectin benzoate (EMB) is widely used for salmon delousing. While resistance to EMB is widespread in Atlantic populations of L. salmonis, the molecular mechanisms of resistance remain to be elucidated. The aim of the present work was to obtain insights into potential EMB resistance mechanisms by identifying genetic and transcriptomic markers associated with EMB resistance.ResultsCrosses were performed between EMB-susceptible and -resistant L. salmonis, sourced from two parental strains isolated in Scotland, producing fully pedigreed families. The EMB susceptibility of individual parasites was characterised using time-to-response bioassays. Parasites of two families were subjected to double digest restriction site-associated DNA sequencing (ddRAD-seq) for simultaneous discovery of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and genotyping. Data analysis revealed that EMB resistance is associated with one quantitative trait locus (QTL) region on L. salmonis chromosome 5. Marker-trait association was confirmed by genotyping assays for 7 SNPs in two additional families. Furthermore, the transcriptome of male parasites of the EMB-susceptible and -resistant L. salmonis parental strains was assessed. Among eighteen sequences showing higher transcript expression in EMB-resistant as compared to drug-susceptible lice, the most strongly up-regulated gene is located in the above QTL region and shows high homology to beta spectrin, a cytoskeleton protein that has roles in neuron architecture and function. Further genes differentially regulated in EMB-resistant lice include a glutathione S-transferase (GST), and genes coding for proteins with predicted roles in mitochondrial function, intracellular signalling or transcription.ConclusionsMajor determinants of EMB resistance in L. salmonis are located on Chromosome 5. Resistance can be predicted using a limited number of genetic markers. Genes transcriptionally up-regulated in EMB resistant parasites include a beta spectrin, a cytoskeletal protein with still incompletely understood roles in neuron structure and function, as well as glutathione S-transferase, an enzyme with potential roles in the biochemical defence against toxicants.
Background Ancient northern East Asians (ANEA) from the Yellow River region, who pioneered millet cultivation, play a crucial role in understanding the origins of ethnolinguistically diverse populations in modern China and the entire landscape of deep genetic structure and variation discovery in modern East Asians. However, the direct links between ANEA and geographically proximate modern populations, as well as the biological adaptive processes involved, remain poorly understood.Results Here, we generated genome-wide SNP data for 264 individuals from geographically different Han populations in Shandong. An integrated genomic resource encompassing both modern and ancient East Asians was compiled to examine fine-scale population admixture scenarios and adaptive traits. The reconstruction of demographic history and hierarchical clustering patterns revealed that individuals from the Shandong Peninsula share a close genetic affinity with ANEA, indicating long-term genetic continuity and mobility in the lower Yellow River basin since the early Neolithic period. Biological adaptive signatures, including those related to immune and metabolic pathways, were identified through analyses of haplotype homozygosity and allele frequency spectra. These signatures are linked to complex traits such as height and body mass index, which may be associated with adaptations to cold environments, dietary practices, and pathogen exposure. Additionally, allele frequency trajectories over time and a haplotype network of two highly differentiated genes, ABCC11 and SLC10A1, were delineated. These genes, which are associated with axillary odor and bilirubin metabolism, respectively, illustrate how local adaptations can influence the diversification of traits in East Asians.Conclusions Our findings provide a comprehensive genomic dataset that elucidates the fine-scale genetic history and evolutionary trajectory of natural selection signals and disease susceptibility in Han Chinese populations. This study serves as a paradigm for integrating spatiotemporally diverse ancient genomes in the era of population genomic medicine.
Background Flowering time has an important effect on regional adaptation and yields for crops. The tyrosine kinase-like (TKL) gene family is widely existed and participates in many biological processes in plants. Furthermore, only few TKLs have been characterized functions in controlling flowering time in wheat. Results Here, we report that TaCTR1, a tyrosine kinase-like (TKL) gene, regulates flowering time in wheat. Based on identification and evolutionary analysis of TKL_CTR1-DRK-2 subfamily in 15 plants, we proposed an evolutionary model for TaCTR1, suggesting that occurrence of some exon fusion events during evolution. The overexpression of TaCTR1 caused early flowering time in transgenic lines. Transcriptomics analysis enabled identification of mass differential expression genes including plant hormone (ET, ABA, IAA, BR) signaling, flavonoid biosynthesis, phenolamides and antioxidant, and flowering-related genes in TaCTR1 overexpression transgenic lines compared with WT plants. qRT-PCR results showed that the expression levels of ethylene (ET) signal-related genes (ETR, EIN, ERF) and flowering-related genes (FT, PPD1, CO, PRR, PHY) were altered in TaCTR1-overexpressing wheat compared with WT plants. Metabonomics analysis showed that flavonoid contents were altered. Conclusions Thus, the results show that TaCTR1 plays a positive role in controlling flowering time by activating various signaling pathways and regulating flowering-related genes, and will provide new insights on the mechanisms of wheat flowering regulation.
BackgroundRNA sequencing is a vital technique for analyzing RNA behavior in cells, but it often suffers from various biases that distort the data. Traditional methods to address these biases are typically empirical and handle them individually, limiting their effectiveness. Our study introduces the Gaussian Self-Benchmarking (GSB) framework, a novel approach that leverages the natural distribution patterns of guanine (G) and cytosine (C) content in RNA to mitigate multiple biases simultaneously. This method is grounded in a theoretical model, organizing k-mers based on their GC content and applying a Gaussian model for alignment to ensure empirical sequencing data closely match their theoretical distribution.ResultsThe GSB framework demonstrated superior performance in mitigating sequencing biases compared to existing methods. Testing with synthetic RNA constructs and real human samples showed that the GSB approach not only addresses individual biases more effectively but also manages co-existing biases jointly. The framework's reliance on accurately pre-determined parameters like mean and standard deviation of GC content distribution allows for a more precise representation of RNA samples. This results in improved accuracy and reliability of RNA sequencing data, enhancing our understanding of RNA behavior in health and disease.ConclusionsThe GSB framework presents a significant advancement in RNA sequencing analysis by providing a well-validated, multi-bias mitigation strategy. It functions independently from previously identified dataset flaws and sets a new standard for unbiased RNA sequencing results. This development enhances the reliability of RNA studies, broadening the potential for scientific breakthroughs in medicine and biology, particularly in genetic disease research and the development of targeted treatments.
Background Bacterial spot of pepper (BSP), caused by four different Xanthomonas species, primarily X. euvesicatoria (Xe), poses a significant challenge in pepper cultivation. Host resistance is considered the most important approach for BSP control, offering long-term protection and sustainability. While breeding for resistance to BSP for many years focused on dominant R genes, introgression of recessive resistance has been a more recent focus of breeding programs. The molecular interactions underlying recessive resistance remain poorly understood. Results In this study, transcriptomic analyses were performed to elucidate defense responses triggered by Xe race P6 infection by two distinct pepper lines: the Xe-resistant line ECW50R containing bs5, a recessive resistance gene that confers resistance to all pepper Xe races, and the Xe-susceptible line ECW. The results revealed a total of 3357 upregulated and 4091 downregulated genes at 0, 1, 2, and 4 days post-inoculation (dpi), with the highest number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) observed at 2 dpi. Pathway analysis highlighted DEGs in key pathways such as plant-pathogen interaction, MAPK signaling pathway, plant hormone signal transduction, and photosynthesis - antenna proteins, along with cysteine and methionine metabolism. Notably, upregulation of genes associated with PAMP-Triggered Immunity (PTI) was observed, including components like FLS2, Ca-dependent pathways, Rboh, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. In support of these results, infiltration of ECW50R leaves with bacterial suspension of Xe led to observable hydrogen peroxide accumulation without a rapid increase in electrolyte leakage, suggestive of the absence of Effector-Triggered Immunity (ETI). Furthermore, the study confirmed that bs5 does not disrupt the effector delivery system, as evidenced by incompatible interactions between avirulence genes and their corresponding dominant resistant genes in the bs5 background. Conclusion Overall, these findings provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying bs5-mediated resistance in pepper against Xe and suggest a robust defense mechanism in ECW50R, primarily mediated through PTI. Given that bs5 provides early strong response for resistance, combining this resistance with other dominant resistance genes will enhance the durability of resistance to BSP.
Background Anguillid eels spend their larval period as leptocephalus larvae that have a unique and specialized body form with leaf-like and transparent features, and they undergo drastic metamorphosis to juvenile glass eels. Less is known about the transition of leptocephali to the glass eel stage, because it is difficult to catch the metamorphosing larvae in the open ocean. However, recent advances in rearing techniques for the Japanese eel have made it possible to study the larval metamorphosis of anguillid eels. In the present study, we investigated the dynamics of gene expression during the metamorphosis of Japanese eel leptocephali using RNA sequencing. Results During metamorphosis, Japanese eels were classified into 7 developmental stages according to their morphological characteristics, and RNA sequencing was used to collect gene expression data from each stage. A total of 354.8 million clean reads were generated from the body and 365.5 million from the head, after the processing of raw reads. For filtering of genes that characterize developmental stages, a classification model created by a Random Forest algorithm was built. Using the importance of explanatory variables feature obtained from the created model, we identified 46 genes selected in the body and 169 genes selected in the head that were defined as the "most characteristic genes" during eel metamorphosis. Next, network analysis and subsequently gene clustering were conducted using the most characteristic genes and their correlated genes, and then 6 clusters in the body and 5 clusters in the head were constructed. Then, the characteristics of the clusters were revealed by Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis. The expression patterns and GO terms of each stage were consistent with previous observations and experiments during the larval metamorphosis of the Japanese eel. Conclusion Genome and transcriptome resources have been generated for metamorphosing Japanese eels. Genes that characterized metamorphosis of the Japanese eel were identified through statistical modeling by a Random Forest algorithm. The functions of these genes were consistent with previous observations and experiments during the metamorphosis of anguillid eels.
Gonad development includes sex determination and divergent maturation of the testes and ovaries. Recent advances in measuring gene expression in single cells are providing new insights into this complex process. However, the underlying epigenetic regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we profiled chromatin accessibility in mouse gonadal cells of both sexes from embryonic day 11.5 to 14.5 using single-cell assay for transposase accessible chromatin by sequencing (scATAC-seq). Our results showed that individual cell types can be inferred by the chromatin landscape, and that cells can be temporally ordered along developmental trajectories. Integrative analysis of transcriptomic and chromatin-accessibility maps identified multiple putative regulatory elements proximal to key gonadal genes Nr5a1, Sox9 and Wt1. We also uncover cell type-specific regulatory factors underlying cell type specification. Overall, our results provide a better understanding of the epigenetic landscape associated with the progressive restriction of cell fates in the gonad.
The Golgi apparatus is a crucial component of the inner membrane system in eukaryotic cells, playing a central role in protein biosynthesis. Dysfunction of the Golgi apparatus has been linked to neurodegenerative diseases. Accurate identification of sub-Golgi protein types is therefore essential for developing effective treatments for such diseases. Due to the expensive and time-consuming nature of experimental methods for identifying sub-Golgi protein types, various computational methods have been developed as identification tools. However, the majority of these methods rely solely on neighboring features in the protein sequence and neglect the crucial spatial structure information of the protein.To discover alternative methods for accurately identifying sub-Golgi proteins, we have developed a model called GASIDN. The GASIDN model extracts multi-dimension features by utilizing a 1D convolution module on protein sequences and a graph learning module on contact maps constructed from AlphaFold2.The model utilizes the deep representation learning model SeqVec to initialize protein sequences. GASIDN achieved accuracy values of 98.4% and 96.4% in independent testing and ten-fold cross-validation, respectively, outperforming the majority of previous predictors. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first method that utilizes multi-scale feature fusion to identify and locate sub-Golgi proteins. In order to assess the generalizability and scalability of our model, we conducted experiments to apply it in the identification of proteins from other organelles, including plant vacuoles and peroxisomes. The results obtained from these experiments demonstrated promising outcomes, indicating the effectiveness and versatility of our model. The source code and datasets can be accessed at https://github.com/SJNNNN/GASIDN.
Background Wastewaters are considered as important players in the spread of antimicrobial resistance, thus affecting the health of humans and animals. Here, we focused on wastewaters as a possible source of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales for the environment. Methods A total of 180 presumptive coliforms from hospital and municipal wastewaters, and a river in the Czech Republic were obtained by selective cultivation on meropenem-supplemented media and tested for presence of carbapenemase-encoding genes by PCR. Strains carrying genes of interest were characterized by testing antimicrobial susceptibility, carbapenemase production and combination of short- and long- read whole-genome sequencing. The phylogenetic tree including publicly available genomes of Enterobacter asburiae was conducted using Prokka, Roary and RAxML. Results Three VIM-producing Enterobacter asburiae isolates, members of the Enterobacter cloacae complex, were detected from hospital and municipal wastewaters, and the river. The blaVIM-1 gene was located within a class 1 integron that was carried by different F-type plasmids and one non-typeable plasmid. Furthermore, one of the isolates carried plasmid-borne colistin-resistance gene mcr-10, while in another isolate chromosomally located mcr-9 without colistin resistance phenotype was detected. In addition, the analysis of 685 publicly available E. asburiae genomes showed they frequently carry carbapenemase genes, highlighting the importance of this species in the emergence of resistance to last-line antibiotics. Conclusion Our findings pointed out the important contribution of hospital and community wastewaters in transmission of multi-drug resistant pathogens.
BackgroundThe Tibetan sheep is one of the three major primitive sheep breeds in China, representing a unique and high-quality genetic resource in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau and neighboring high-altitude regions, exhibiting exceptional adaptability to high-altitude climatic environments. However, research on the genetic relationships among different populations of Tibetan sheep at the whole-genome level remains insufficient. This study aims to explore the population structure and historical dynamics among 11 Tibetan sheep populations, accurately assess the genetic diversity within the populations, and providing a theoretical basis for the development of targeted genetic breeding strategies for Tibetan sheep.ResultsIn this study, a total of 10,884,454 high-quality SNPs were obtained. All Tibetan sheep populations exhibited varying degrees of linkage disequilibrium, with similar decay rates; among them, the WT population showed the fastest decay, while the TS population exhibited the slowest decay rate. Analyses using Tajima's D and pi indicated that the genetic diversity levels of the Tibetan sheep populations are generally low. Fst results revealed that most populations exhibited moderate to low levels of genetic differentiation. The effective population size among Tibetan sheep populations showed an increasing trend over time. The evolutionary relationships among Tibetan sheep populations reflect the correlation between their geographical locations and genomic genetic distances, while also indirectly confirming the impact of historical activities such as early human migration, admixture, fusion, and expansion on the population sizes and distributions of Tibetan sheep.ConclusionsThe results indicate that the genetic diversity levels and genetic differentiation among Tibetan sheep populations are relatively low. In this study, we identified the genetic characteristics of Tibetan sheep populations, which exhibit low levels of diversity, genetic differentiation, and a strong population structure. A deeper genomic exploration of the population structure and diversity status of Tibetan sheep populations will provide theoretical support for subsequent genetic breeding and diversity conservation efforts.
Background The MADS-box gene family is widely distributed in the plant kingdom, and its members typically encoding transcription factors to regulate various aspects of plant growth and development. In particular, the MIKC-type MADS-box genes play a crucial role in the determination of floral organ development and identity recognition. As a type of androdioecy plant, Chionanthus retusus have unique gender differentiation. Manifested as male individuals with only male flowers and female individuals with only bisexual flowers. However, due to the lack of reference genome information, the characteristics of MIKC-type MADS-box genes in C. retusus and its role in gender differentiation of C. retusus remain largely unknown. Therefore, it is necessary to identify and characterize the MADS-box gene family within the genome of the C. retusus. Results In this study, we performed a genome-wide identification and analysis of MIKC-type MADS-box genes in C. retusus (2n = 2x = 46), utilizing the latest reference genome, and studied its expression pattern in individuals of different genders. As a result, we identified a total of 61 MIKC-type MADS-box genes in C. retusus. 61 MIKC-type MADS-box genes can be divided into 12 subfamilies and distributed on 18 chromosomes. Genome collinearity analysis revealed their conservation in evolution, while gene structure, domains and motif analysis indicated their conservation in structure. Finally, based on their expression patterns in floral organs of different sexes, we have identified that CrMADS45 and CrMADS60 may potentially be involved in the gender differentiation of C. retusus. Conclusions Our studies have provided a general understanding of the conservation and characteristics of the MIKC-type MADS-box genes family in C. retusus. And it has been demonstrated that members of the AG subfamily, CrMADS45 and CrMADS60, may play important roles in the gender differentiation of C. retusus. This provides a reference for future breeding efforts to improve flower types in C. retusus and further investigate the role of MIKC-type MADS-box genes in gender differentiation.
BackgroundIt has been reported that the most common post-transcriptional modification of eukaryotic RNA is N6-methyladenosine (m6A). Previous studies show m6A is a key regulator for viral infection and immune response. However, whether there is a pathogen stimulus-dependent m6A regulation in invertebrate shrimp has not been studied.ResultsIn this study, we performed a transcriptome-wide profiling of mRNA m6A methylation in shrimp (Marsupenaeus japonicus) after white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) infection by methylated RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeRIP-seq). A total of 15,436 m6A peaks were identified in the shrimp, distributed in 8,108 genes, mainly enriched in the CDS, 3 ' UTR region and near the stop codon. After WSSV infection, we identified 2,260 m6A peaks with significantly changes, of which 1,973 peaks were significantly up-regulated and 287 peaks were significantly down-regulated. 1,795 genes were identified as differentially methylated genes. GO and KEGG analysis showed that hyper-methylated genes or hypo-methylated genes were highly associated with innate immune process and related to metabolic pathways including HIF-1 signaling pathway, lysine degradation and Wnt signaling pathway. Combined analysis showed a positive correlation between m6A methylation levels and mRNA expression levels. In addition, computational predictions of protein-protein interaction indicated that genes with altered levels of m6A methylation and mRNA expression clustered in metabolism, DNA replication, and protein ubiquitination. ZC3H12A and HIF-1 were two hub genes in protein-protein interaction (PPI) network that involved in immune and metabolism processes, respectively.ConclusionOur study explored the m6A methylation pattern of mRNA in shrimp after WSSV infection, exhibited the first m6A map of shrimp at the stage of WSSV induced metabolic reprogramming. These findings may reveal the possible mechanisms of m6A-mediated innate immune response in invertebrates.
The polar bear (Ursus maritimus) occupies a relatively narrow ecological niche, with many traits adapted for cold temperatures, movement across snow, ice and open water, and for consuming highly lipid-dense prey species. The divergence of polar bears from brown bears (Ursus arctos) and their adaptation to their Arctic lifestyle is a well-known example of rapid evolution. Previous research investigating whole genomes uncovered twelve key genes that are highly differentiated between polar and brown bears, show signatures of selection in the polar bear lineage, and are associated with polar bear adaptation to the Arctic environment. Further research suggested fixed derived alleles in these genes arose from selection on both standing variation and de novo mutations in the evolution of polar bears. Here, we reevaluate these findings based on a larger and geographically more representative dataset of 119 polar bears and 135 brown bears, and assess the timing of derived allele fixation in polar bears by incorporating the genomes of two Late Pleistocene individuals (aged 130-100,000 years old and 100-70,000 years old). In contrast with previous results, we found no evidence of derived alleles fixed in present-day polar bears within the key genes arising from de novo mutation. Most derived alleles fixed in present-day polar bears were also fixed in the Late Pleistocene polar bears, suggesting selection occurred prior to 70,000 years ago. However, some derived alleles fixed in present-day polar bears were not fixed in the two Late Pleistocene polar bears, including at sites within APOB, LYST, and TTN. These three genes are associated with cardiovascular function, metabolism, and pigmentation, suggesting selection may have acted on different loci at different times.
BackgroundThe Caridea, affiliated with Malacostraca, Decapoda, and Pleocyemata, constitute one of the most significant shrimp groups. They are widely distributed across diverse aquatic habitats worldwide, enriching their evolutionary history. In recent years, considerable attention has been focused on the classification and systematic evolution of Caridea, yet controversies still exist regarding the phylogenetic relationships among families.MethodsHere, the complete mitochondrial genome (mitogenome) sequences of five caridean species, namely Heterocarpus sibogae, Procletes levicarina, Macrobrachium sp., Latreutes anoplonyx, and Atya gabonensis, were determined using second-generation high-throughput sequencing technology. The basic structural characteristics, nucleotide composition, amino acid content, and codon usage bias of their mitogenomes were analyzed. Selection pressure values of protein-coding genes (PCGs) in species within the families Pandalidae, Palaemonidae, and Atyidae were also computed. Phylogenetic trees based on the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of 13 PCGs from 103 caridean species were constructed, and divergence times for various families within Caridea were estimated.ResultsThe mitogenome of these five caridean species vary in length from 15,782 to 16,420 base pairs, encoding a total of 37 or 38 genes, including 13 PCGs, 2 rRNA genes, and 22 or 23 tRNA genes. Specifically, L. anoplonyx encodes an additional tRNA gene, bringing its total gene count to 38. The base composition of the mitogenomes of these five species exhibited a higher proportion of adenine-thymine (AT) bases. Six start codons and four stop codons were identified across the five species. Analysis of amino acid content and codon usage revealed variations among the five species. Analysis of selective pressure in Pandalidae, Palaemonidae, and Atyidae showed that the Ka/Ks values of PCGs in all three families were less than 1, indicating that purifying selection is influencing on their evolution. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that each family within Caridea is monophyletic. The results of gene rearrangement and phylogenetic analysis demonstrated correlations between these two aspects. Divergence time estimation, supported by fossil records, indicated that the divergence of Caridea species occurred in the Triassic period of the Mesozoic era, with subsequent differentiation into two major lineages during the Jurassic period.ConclusionsThis study explored the fundamental characteristics and phylogenetic relationships of mitogenomes within the infraorder Caridea, providing valuable insights into their classification, interspecific evolutionary patterns, and the evolutionary status of various Caridea families. The findings provide essential references for identifying shrimp species and detecting significant gene rearrangements within the Caridea infraorder.
BackgroundGlobal warming-induced environmental stresses have diverse effects on gene expression and regulation in the life processes of various aquatic organisms. N6 adenylate methylation (m6A) modifications are known to influence mRNA transcription, localization, translation, stability, splicing, and nuclear export, which are pivotal in mediating stress responses. Apostichopus japonicus is a significant species in aquaculture and a representative of benthic organisms in ecosystems, thus there is a growing need for research on its heat stress mechanism.ResultsIn this study, m6A-modified whole transcriptome profiles of the respiratory tree tissues of A. japonicus in the control (T18) and high-temperature stress (T32) groups were obtained using MeRIP-seq technology. The results showed that 7,211 common m6A peaks, and 9,459 genes containing common m6A were identified in three replicates T18 and T32 groups. The m6A peaks were found to be highly enriched in the 3' untranslated region, and the common sequence of the m6A peak was also enriched, which was shown as RRACH (R = G or A; H = A, C, or U). A total of 1,200 peaks were identified as significantly differentially enriched in the T32 group compared with the T18 group. Among them, 245 peaks were upregulated and 955 were downregulated, which indicated that high temperature stress significantly altered the methylation pattern of m6A, and there were more demethylation sites in the T32 group. Conjoint analysis of the m6A methylation modification and the transcript expression level (the MeRIP-seq and RNA-seq data) showed co-differentiated 395 genes were identified, which were subsequently divided into four groups with a predominant pattern that more genes with decreased m6A modification and up-regulated expression, including HSP70IV, EIF2AK1, etc. GO enrichment and KEGG analyses of differential m6A peak related genes and co-differentiated genes showed the genes were significantly associated with transcription process and pathways such as protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, Wnt signaling pathway, and mTOR signaling pathway, etc.ConclusionThe comparisons of m6A modification patterns and conjoint analyses of m6A modification and gene expression profiles suggest that m6A modification was involved in the regulation of heat stress-responsive genes and important functional pathways in A. japonicus in response to high-temperature stress. The study will contribute to elucidate the regulatory mechanism of m6A modification in the response of A. japonicus to environmental stress, as well as the conservation and utilization of sea cucumber resources in the context of environmental changes.
Salinity impacts crop growth and productivity and lowers the activities of rhizosphere microbiota. The identification and utilization of habitat-specific salinity-adapted plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) are considered alternative strategies to improve the growth and yields of crops in salinity-affected coastal agricultural fields. In this study, we characterize strain L1I39(T), the first Aquabacter species with PGPR traits isolated from a salt-tolerant pokkali rice cultivated in brackish environments. L1I39(T) is positive for 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase activity and nitrogen fixation and can promote pokkali rice growth by supplying fixed nitrogen under a nitrogen-deficient seawater condition. Importantly, enhanced plant growth and efficient root colonization were evident in L1I39(T)-inoculated plants grown under 20% seawater but not in zero-seawater conditions, identifying brackish conditions as a key local environmental factor critical for L1I39(T)-pokkali rice symbiosis. Detailed physiological studies revealed that L1I39(T) is well-adapted to brackish environments. In-depth genome analysis of L1I39(T) identified multiple gene systems contributing to its plant-associated lifestyle and brackish adaptations. The 16S rRNA-based metagenomic study identified L1I39(T) as an important rare PGPR taxon. Based on the polyphasic taxonomy analysis, we established strain L1I39(T) as a novel Aquabacter species and proposed Aquabacter pokkalii sp nov. Overall, this study provides a better understanding of a marine-adapted PGPR strain L1I39(T) that may perform a substantial role in host growth and health in nitrogen-poor brackish environments.
Genes containing the SET domain can catalyse histone lysine methylation, which in turn has the potential to cause changes to chromatin structure and regulation of the transcription of genes involved in diverse physiological and developmental processes. However, the functions of SET domain-containing (StSET) genes in potato still need to be studied. The objectives of our study can be summarized as in silico analysis to (i) identify StSET genes in the potato genome, (ii) systematically analyse gene structure, chromosomal distribution, gene duplication events, promoter sequences, and protein domains, (iii) perform phylogenetic analyses, (iv) compare the SET domain-containing genes of potato with other plant species with respect to protein domains and orthologous relationships, (v) analyse tissue-specific expression, and (vi) study the expression of StSET genes in response to drought and heat stresses. In this study, we identified 57 StSET genes in the potato genome, and the genes were physically mapped onto eleven chromosomes. The phylogenetic analysis grouped these StSET genes into six clades. We found that tandem duplication through sub-functionalisation has contributed only marginally to the expansion of the StSET gene family. The protein domain TDBD (PFAM ID: PF16135) was detected in StSET genes of potato while it was absent in all other previously studied species. This study described three pollen-specific StSET genes in the potato genome. Expression analysis of four StSET genes under heat and drought in three potato clones revealed that these genes might have non-overlapping roles under different abiotic stress conditions and durations. The present study provides a comprehensive analysis of StSET genes in potatoes, and it serves as a basis for further functional characterisation of StSET genes towards understanding their underpinning biological mechanisms in conferring stress tolerance.
Background Microsporidia are a large taxon of intracellular pathogens characterized by extraordinarily streamlined genomes with unusually high sequence divergence and many species-specific adaptations. These unique factors pose challenges for traditional genome annotation methods based on sequence similarity. As a result, many of the microsporidian genomes sequenced to date contain numerous genes of unknown function. Recent innovations in rapid and accurate structure prediction and comparison, together with the growing amount of data in structural databases, provide new opportunities to assist in the functional annotation of newly sequenced genomes.Results In this study, we established a workflow that combines sequence and structure-based functional gene annotation approaches employing a ChimeraX plugin named ANNOTEX (Annotation Extension for ChimeraX), allowing for visual inspection and manual curation. We employed this workflow on a high-quality telomere-to-telomere sequenced tetraploid genome of Vairimorpha necatrix. First, the 3080 predicted protein-coding DNA sequences, of which 89% were confirmed with RNA sequencing data, were used as input. Next, ColabFold was used to create protein structure predictions, followed by a Foldseek search for structural matching to the PDB and AlphaFold databases. The subsequent manual curation, using sequence and structure-based hits, increased the accuracy and quality of the functional genome annotation compared to results using only traditional annotation tools. Our workflow resulted in a comprehensive description of the V. necatrix genome, along with a structural summary of the most prevalent protein groups, such as the ricin B lectin family. In addition, and to test our tool, we identified the functions of several previously uncharacterized Encephalitozoon cuniculi genes.Conclusion We provide a new functional annotation tool for divergent organisms and employ it on a newly sequenced, high-quality microsporidian genome to shed light on this uncharacterized intracellular pathogen of Lepidoptera. The addition of a structure-based annotation approach can serve as a valuable template for studying other microsporidian or similarly divergent species.
Alterations in splicing patterns of leukemic cells have a functional impact and influence most cellular processes since aberrantly spliced isoforms can provide a proliferative advantage, enable to evade apoptosis, induce metabolic reprogramming, change cell signaling and antitumor immune response, or develop drug resistance. In this Review, we first characterize the general mechanism of mRNA processing regulation with a focus on the role of splicing factors, which are commonly mutated in blood neoplasms. Next, we provide a comprehensive summary on the current understanding of alternative splicing events, which confer resistance to targeted treatment strategies and immunotherapy. We introduce the functional consequences of mis-spliced variants (CD19-triangle ex2, CD22-triangle ex2, CD22-triangle ex5-6, CD33-triangle ex2, PIK3CD-S, BCR-ABL35INS, BIM-gamma, FPGS-8PR, dCK-triangle ex2-3, and SLC29A1-triangle ex13) production in leukemic cells. Of therapeutic relevance, we summarize novel strategies focused on pharmacological correction of aberrant splicing, including small-molecule splicing modulators and splice-switching oligonucleotides. We also include the findings of recent preclinical investigation of the antisense strategies based on modified oligonucleotides. Finally, we discuss the potential of emerging combination therapies for the treatment of hematological disorders with disrupted splicing.
We investigated whole blood and hepatic mRNA expressions of immune genes and rumen microbiome of crossbred beef steers with divergent residual feed intake phenotype to identify relevant biological processes underpinning feed efficiency in beef cattle. Low-RFI beef steers (n = 20; RFI = - 1.83 kg/d) and high-RFI beef steers (n = 20; RFI = + 2.12 kg/d) were identified from a group of 108 growing crossbred beef steers (average BW = 282 +/- 30.4 kg) fed a high-forage total mixed ration after a 70-d performance testing period. At the end of the 70-d testing period, liver biopsies and blood samples were collected for total RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis. Rumen fluid samples were also collected for analysis of the rumen microbial community. The mRNA expression of 84 genes related to innate and adaptive immunity was analyzed using pathway-focused PCR-based arrays. Differentially expressed genes were determined using P-value <= 0.05 and fold change (FC) >= 1.5 (in whole blood) or >= 2.0 (in the liver). Gene ontology analysis of the differentially expressed genes revealed that pathways related to pattern recognition receptor activity, positive regulation of phagocytosis, positive regulation of vitamin metabolic process, vascular endothelial growth factor production, positive regulation of epithelial tube formation and T-helper cell differentiation were significantly enriched (FDR < 0.05) in low-RFI steers. In the rumen, the relative abundance of PeH15, Arthrobacter, Moryella, Weissella, and Muribaculaceae was enriched in low-RFI steers, while Methanobrevibacter, Bacteroidales_BS11_gut_group, Bacteroides and Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 were reduced. In conclusion, our study found that low-RFI beef steers exhibit increased mRNA expression of genes related to immune cell functions in whole blood and liver tissues, specifically those involved in pathogen recognition and phagocytosis regulation. Additionally, these low-RFI steers showed differences in the relative abundance of some microbial taxa which may partially account for their improved feed efficiency compared to high-RFI steers.
Magnesium is important for enzymatic reactions and physiological functions, and its intracellular concentration is tightly regulated. Atlantic salmon has the ability to handle large changes in environmental Mg2+ concentration when migrating between freshwater and seawater habitats, making it a relevant model to investigate Mg2+ homeostasis. Parr-smolt transformation (PST) is a life history transition which prepares the freshwater juvenile for the marine environment. The kidney is one of the key organs involved in handling higher salt load in teleosts. Though several key Mg2+ transport families (SLC41, CNNM and TRPM6-7) have recently been identified in mammals and a few fishes, the molecular bases of Mg2+ homeostasis in salmon are not known. We found that all three families are represented in the salmon genome and exhibit a clear conservation of key functional domains and residues. Present study indicates a selective retention of paralogous Mg2+ transporters from the fourth whole genome duplication round (Ss4R) and a differential regulation of these genes, which suggests neo- and/or sub-functionalization events. slc41a1-1, cnnm4a1, -4a2 and trpm7-2 are the main upregulated genes in the kidney during PST and remain high or further increase after exposure to seawater (33 ppt). By contrast, slc41a1-2, -3a, cnnm3-1, and cnnm3-2 are only upregulated after seawater exposure. In addition, slc41a1-1, -2, and trpm7-2 respond when exposed to brackish water (12 ppt), while cnnm3-1 and cnnm3-2 do not, indicating the existence of a lower salinity threshold response for these members. Finally, the response of slc41a1-1, -2 and trpm7-2 in salmon was significantly reduced or completely abolished when exposed to Mg2+-reduced brackish water, while others were not, suggesting they might be specifically regulated by Mg2+. Our results are consistent with previous findings on other euryhaline teleosts and chondrichthyan species, suggesting the existence of common adaptive strategies to thrive in high salinity environments. Concomitantly, salmonid-specific innovations, such as differential regulation and recruitment of family members not previously shown to be regulated in the kidney (Cnnm1 and Cnnm4) of other vertebrates might point to adaptions associated with their very plastic anadromous life cycle.
Background Floral transition in cereals is a critical phenomenon influenced by exogenous and endogenous signals, determining crop yield and reproduction. Flowering Locus T-like (FT-like) genes encode a mobile florigen, the main signaling molecule for flowering. Results In this study, we characterized two FT-like genes, FTL9 and FTL10, to study their functional diversity in flowering control in rice. We compared independent mutant lines of ftl10 with WT and observed negligible differences in the flowering phenotype, or agronomic traits implying potentially redundant roles of FTL10 loss-of-function in flowering control in rice. Nevertheless, we found that overexpression of FTL10, but not FTL9, substantially accelerated flowering, indicating the flowering-promoting role of FTL10 and the divergent functions between FTL9 and FTL10 in flowering. Besides flowering, additive agronomic roles were observed for FTL10-OE regulating the number of effective panicles per plant, the number of primary branches per panicle, and spikelets per panicle without regulating seed size. Mechanistically, our Y2H and BiFC analyses demonstrate that FTL10, in contrast to FTL9, can interact with FD1 and GF14c, forming a flowering activation complex and thereby regulating flowering. Conclusion Altogether, our results elucidate the regulatory roles of FTL9 and FTL10 in flowering control, unveiling the molecular basis of functional divergence between FTL10 and FTL9, which provides mechanistic insights into shaping the dynamics of flowering time regulation in rice.
Cysteine-rich polycomb-like proteins (CPPs), pivotal transcription factors crucial for evolution of plants from germination to maturity, and adaptation to environmental stresses, have not yet been characterized within the context of Moso bamboo. The CPP gene family of Moso bamboo was identified through bioinformatics, and the structural and functional attributes of the gene, including its physicochemical properties, evolutionary relationships, and gene-protein structures, were revealed. Additionally, the current study also offers valuable information on the patterns of gene expression in bamboo shoots during the period of accelerated development. The results show that the Moso bamboo genome contains 17 CPP members. Molecular phylogenetic relationships indicated that CPPs could be divided into three subfamilies and that CPP members of the same subfamily shared similar gene structures, motifs and conserved structural domains. The covariance analysis showed that the covariance between CPP and Oryza sativa was higher than that between Arabidopsis. Protein homology modeling showed that CPP proteins contain the DNA-binding domain of typical transcription factors. Transcriptomic data analysis revealed that CPP gene expression differs between tissues and organs. CPP could be regulated in response to exogenous gibberellin (GA) and naphthalene acetic acid (NAA). The qRT-PCR experiments demonstrated that CPP was crucial in the initial and fast expansion of bamboo shoots. Additionally, gene ontology (GO), KEGG enrichment and CPP regulatory network map analyses revealed multiple functional annotations of PeCPP-regulated downstream target genes. The results of this study will not only lay the foundation for further exploration of the detailed biological functions of CPP genes in the growth and development of Moso bamboo, but also establish the groundwork for future genetic enhancement of fast-growing forest trees.
BackgroundGrapes are highly valued for their nutritional and economic benefits, and have been widely studied for their biological attributes such as fruit development, quality formation, and stress resistance. One significant threat to grape quality is gray mold, caused by Botrytis cinerea, which can infect the flowers, fruits, leaves, and stems. The quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), known for its high sensitivity and quantitative accuracy, is an essential tool for analyzing gene expression related to the pathogenesis of gray mold, thereby providing deeper insights into the disease.ResultIn this study, we aim to identify stable internal reference genes crucial for accurate gene expression analysis via qRT-PCR. Utilizing transcriptome data from grapes under various disease stresses, we identified twelve candidate reference genes with consistently high expression levels. The stability of these genes was assessed through delta-CT, geNorm, NormFinder, BestKeeper, and RefFinder analyses after establishing the cycling thresholds (Ct) in different grape varieties treated with Botrytis cinerea.ConclusionsOur findings reveal that VIT-17s0000g02750 and VIT-06s0004g04280 exhibit stable expression and are suitable as new reference genes. This foundational work supports further research into the molecular mechanisms of grape biological processes.
Background Indigenous chickens were developed through a combination of natural and artificial selection; essentially, changes in genomes led to the formation of these modern breeds via admixture events. However, their confusing genetic backgrounds include a genomic footprint regulating complex traits, which is not conducive to modern animal breeding. Results To better evaluate the candidate regions under domestication in indigenous chickens, we considered both runs of homozygosity (ROHs) and selective signatures in 13 indigenous chickens. The genomes of Silkie feather chickens presented the highest heterozygosity, whereas the highest inbreeding status and ROH number were found in Luhua chickens. Short ROH (< 1 Mb), were the principal type in all chickens. A total of 291 ROH islands were detected, and QTLdb mapping results indicated that body weight and carcass traits were the most important traits. An ROH on chromosome 2 covering VSTM2A gene was detected in 12 populations. Combined analysis with the Tajima's D index revealed that 18 genes (e.g., VSTM2A, BBOX1, and RYR2) were under selection and covered by ROH islands. Transcriptional analysis results showed that RYR2 and BBOX1 were specifically expressed in the heart and muscle tissue, respectively. Conclusion Based on genome-wide scanning for ROH and selective signatures, we evaluated the genomic characteristics and detected significant candidate genes covered by ROH islands and selective signatures. The findings in this study facilitated the understanding of genetic diversity and provided valuable insights for chicken breeding and conservation strategies.
The growth, yield, and seed quality of rapeseed are negatively affected by drought stress. Therefore, it is of great value to understand the molecular mechanism behind this phenomenon. In a previous study, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) were found to play a key role in the response of rapeseed seedlings to drought stress. However, many questions remained unanswered. This study was the first to investigate the expression profile of lncRNAs not only under control and drought treatment, but also under the rehydration treatment. A total of 381 differentially expressed lncRNA and 10,253 differentially expressed mRNAs were identified in the comparison between drought stress and control condition. In the transition from drought stress to rehydration, 477 differentially expressed lncRNAs and 12,543 differentially expressed mRNAs were detected. After identifying the differentially expressed (DE) lncRNAs, the comprehensive lncRNAs-engaged network with the co-expressed mRNAs in leaves under control, drought and rehydration was investigated. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis of co-expressed mRNAs identified the most significant pathways related with plant hormones (expecially abscisic acid, auxin, cytokinins, and gibberellins) in the signal transduction. The genes, co-expressed with the most-enriched DE-lncRNAs, were considered as the most effective candidates in the water-loss and water-recovery processes, including protein phosphatase 2 C (PP2C), ABRE-binding factors (ABFs), and SMALL AUXIN UP-REGULATED RNAs (SAURs). In summary, these analyses clearly demonstrated that DE-lncRNAs can act as a regulatory hub in plant-water interaction by controlling phytohormone signaling pathways and provided an alternative way to explore the complex mechanisms of drought tolerance in rapeseed.
Background Broodiness significantly impacts poultry egg production, particularly notable in specific breeds such as the black-boned Silky, characterized by pronounced broodiness. An understanding of the alterations in ovarian signaling is essential for elucidating the mechanisms that influence broodiness. However, comparative research on the characteristics of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in the ovaries of broody chickens (BC) and high egg-laying chickens (GC) remains scant. In this investigation, we employed RNA sequencing to assess the ovarian transcriptomes, which include both lncRNAs and mRNAs, in eight Taihe Black-Bone Silky Fowls (TBsf), categorized into broody and high egg-laying groups. This study aims to provide a clearer understanding of the genetic underpinnings associated with broodiness and egg production. Results We have identified a total of 16,444 mRNAs and 18,756 lncRNAs, of which 349 mRNAs and 651 lncRNAs exhibited significantly different expression (DE) between the BC and GC groups. Furthermore, we have identified the cis-regulated and trans-regulated target genes of differentially abundant lncRNA transcripts and have constructed an lncRNA-mRNA trans-regulated interaction network linked to ovarian follicle development. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation analyses have revealed that DE mRNAs and the target genes of DE lncRNAs are associated with pathways including neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, CCR6 chemokine receptor binding, G-protein coupled receptor binding, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and ECM-receptor interaction. Conclusion Our research presents a comprehensive compilation of lncRNAs and mRNAs linked to ovarian development. Additionally, it establishes a predictive interaction network involving differentially abundant lncRNAs and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) within TBsf. This significantly contributes to our understanding of the intricate interactions between lncRNAs and genes governing brooding behavior.
BackgroundTranscriptome-based prediction of complex phenotypes is a relatively new statistical method that links genetic variation to phenotypic variation. The selection of large-effect genes based on a priori biological knowledge is beneficial for predicting oligogenic traits; however, such a simple gene selection method is not applicable to polygenic traits because causal genes or large-effect loci are often unknown. Here, we used several gene-level features and tested whether it was possible to select a gene subset that resulted in better predictive ability than using all genes for predicting a polygenic trait.ResultsUsing the phenotypic values of shoot and root traits and transcript abundances in leaves and roots of 57 rice accessions, we evaluated the predictive abilities of the transcriptome-based prediction models. Leaf transcripts predicted shoot phenotypes, such as plant height, more accurately than root transcripts, whereas root transcripts predicted root phenotypes, such as crown root length, more accurately than leaf transcripts. Furthermore, we used the following three features to train the prediction model: (1) tissue specificity of the transcripts, (2) ontology annotations, and (3) co-expression modules for selecting gene subsets. Although models trained by a gene subset often resulted in lower predictive abilities than the model trained by all genes, some gene subsets showed improved predictive ability. For example, using genes expressed in roots but not in leaves, the predictive ability for crown root diameter was improved by more than 10% (R2 = 0.59 when using all genes; R2 = 0.66, using 1,554 root-specifically expressed genes). Similarly, genes annotated as "gibberellic acid sensitivity" showed higher predictive ability than using all genes for root dry weight.ConclusionsOur results highlight both the possibility and difficulty of selecting an appropriate gene subset to predict polygenic traits from transcript abundance, given the current biological knowledge and information. Further integration of multiple sources of information, as well as improvements in gene characterization, may enable the selection of an optimal gene set for the prediction of polygenic phenotypes.
Strong selection on complex traits can lead to skewed trait means and reduced trait variability in populations. An example of this phenomenon can be evidenced in allele frequency changes and skewed trait distributions driven by persistent human-directed selective pressures in domesticated species. Dog domestication is linked to several genomic variants; however, the functional impacts of these variants may not always be straightforward when found in non-coding regions of the genome. Four polymorphic transposable elements (TE) found within non-coding sites along a 5 Mb region on canine CFA6 have evolved due to directional selection associated with heightened human-directed hyper-sociability in domesticated dogs. We found that the polymorphic TE in intron 17 of the canine GTF2I gene, which was previously reported to be negatively correlated with canid human-directed hyper-sociability, is associated with altered chromatin looping and hence distinct cis-regulatory landscapes. We reported supporting evidence of an E2F1-DNA binding peak concordant with the altered loop and higher expression of GTF2I exon 18, indicative of alternative splicing. Globally, we discovered differences in pathways regulating the extra-cellular matrix with respect to TE copy number. Overall, we reported evidence suggesting an intriguing molecular convergence between the emergence of hypersocial behaviors in dogs and the same genes that, when hemizygous, produce human Williams Beuren Syndrome characterized by cranio-facial defects and heightened social behaviors. Our results additionally emphasize the often-overlooked potential role of chromatin architecture in social evolution.
Background Detecting epistatic interactions (EIs) involves the exploration of associations among single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and complex diseases, which is an important task in genome-wide association studies. The EI detection problem is dependent on epistasis models and corresponding optimization methods. Although various models and methods have been proposed to detect EIs, identifying EIs efficiently and accurately is still a challenge.Results Here, we propose a linear mixed statistical epistasis model (LMSE) and a spherical evolution approach with a feedback mechanism (named SEEI). The LMSE model expands the existing single epistasis models such as LR-Score, K2-Score, Mutual information, and Gini index. The SEEI includes an adaptive spherical search strategy and population updating strategy, which ensures that the algorithm is not easily trapped in local optima. We analyzed the performances of 8 random disease models, 12 disease models with marginal effects, 30 disease models without marginal effects, and 10 high-order disease models. The 60 simulated disease models and a real breast cancer dataset were used to evaluate eight algorithms (SEEI, EACO, EpiACO, FDHEIW, MP-HS-DHSI, NHSA-DHSC, SNPHarvester, CSE). Three evaluation criteria (pow1, pow2, pow3), a T-test, and a Friedman test were used to compare the performances of these algorithms. The results show that the SEEI algorithm (order 1, averages ranks = 13.125) outperformed the other algorithms in detecting EIs.Conclusions Here, we propose an LMSE model and an evolutionary computing method (SEEI) to solve the optimization problem of the LMSE model. The proposed method performed better than the other seven algorithms tested in its ability to identify EIs in genome-wide association datasets. We identified new SNP-SNP combinations in the real breast cancer dataset and verified the results. Our findings provide new insights for the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/scutdy/SSO/blob/master/SEEI.zip.Conclusions Here, we propose an LMSE model and an evolutionary computing method (SEEI) to solve the optimization problem of the LMSE model. The proposed method performed better than the other seven algorithms tested in its ability to identify EIs in genome-wide association datasets. We identified new SNP-SNP combinations in the real breast cancer dataset and verified the results. Our findings provide new insights for the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/scutdy/SSO/blob/master/SEEI.zip.
Background The absence of heterozygosity (AOH) is a kind of genomic change characterized by a long contiguous region of homozygous alleles in a chromosome, which may cause human genetic disorders. However, no method of low-pass whole genome sequencing (LP-WGS) has been reported for the detection of AOH in a low-pass setting of less than onefold. We developed a method, termed CNVseq-AOH, for predicting the absence of heterozygosity using LP-WGS with ultra-low sequencing data, which overcomes the sparse nature of typical LP-WGS data by combing population-based haplotype information, adjustable sliding windows, and recurrent neural network (RNN). We tested the feasibility of CNVseq-AOH for the detection of AOH in 409 cases (11 AOH regions for model training and 863 AOH regions for validation) from the 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP). AOH detection using CNVseq-AOH was also performed on 6 clinical cases with previously ascertained AOHs by whole exome sequencing (WES).Results Using SNP-based microarray results as reference (AOHs detected by CNVseq-AOH with at least a 50% overlap with the AOHs detected by chromosomal microarray analysis), 409 samples (863 AOH regions) in the 1KGP were used for concordant analysis. For 784 AOHs on autosomes and 79 AOHs on the X chromosome, CNVseq-AOH can predict AOHs with a concordant rate of 96.23% and 59.49% respectively based on the analysis of 0.1-fold LP-WGS data, which is far lower than the current standard in the field. Using 0.1-fold LP-WGS data, CNVseq-AOH revealed 5 additional AOHs (larger than 10 Mb in size) in the 409 samples. We further analyzed AOHs larger than 10 Mb, which is recommended for reporting the possibility of UPD. For the 291 AOH regions larger than 10 Mb, CNVseq-AOH can predict AOHs with a concordant rate of 99.66% with only 0.1-fold LP-WGS data. In the 6 clinical cases, CNVseq-AOH revealed all 15 known AOH regions.Conclusions Here we reported a method for analyzing LP-WGS data to accurately identify regions of AOH, which possesses great potential to improve genetic testing of AOH.
BackgroundThe transcription factors (TFs) in thermophilic cyanobacteria might represent a uniquely evolved gene repertoire in light of the strong selective pressure caused by hostile habitats. Understanding the molecular composition of the TF genes in thermophilic cyanobacteria will facilitate further studies regarding verifying their exact biochemical functions and genetic engineering. However, limited information is available on the TFs of thermophilic cyanobacteria. Herein, a thorough investigation and comparative analysis were performed to gain insights into the molecular composition of the TFs in 22 thermophilic cyanobacteria.ResultsThe results suggested a fascinating diversity of the TFs among these thermophiles. The abundance and type of TF genes were diversified in these genomes. The identified TFs are speculated to play various roles in biological regulations. Further comparative and evolutionary genomic analyses revealed that HGT may be associated with the genomic plasticity of TF genes in Thermostichus and Thermosynechococcus strains. Comparative analyses also indicated different pattern of TF composition between thermophiles and corresponding mesophilic reference cyanobacteria. Moreover, the identified unique TFs of thermophiles are putatively involved in various biological regulations, mainly as responses to ambient changes, may facilitating the thermophiles to survive in hot springs.ConclusionThe findings herein shed light on the TFs of thermophilic cyanobacteria and fundamental knowledge for further research regarding thermophilic cyanobacteria with a broad potential for transcription regulations in responses to environmental fluctuations.
Background The WD40 domain, one of the most abundant in eukaryotic genomes, is widely involved in plant growth and development, secondary metabolic biosynthesis, and mediating responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. WD40 repeat (WD40) protein has been systematically studied in several model plants but has not been reported in the Capsicum annuum (pepper) genome. Results Herein, 269, 237, and 257 CaWD40 genes were identified in the Zunla, CM334, and Zhangshugang genomes, respectively. CaWD40 sequences from the Zunla genome were selected for subsequent analysis, including chromosomal localization, phylogenetic relationships, sequence characteristics, motif compositions, and expression profiling. CaWD40 proteins were unevenly distributed on 12 chromosomes, encompassing 19 tandem duplicate gene pairs. The 269 CaWD40s were divided into six main branches (A to F) with 17 different types of domain distribution. The CaWD40 gene family exhibited diverse expression patterns, and several genes were specifically expressed in flowers and seeds. Yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) and dual-luciferase assay indicated that CaWD40-91 could interact with CaAN1 and CaDYT1, suggesting its involvement in anthocyanin biosynthesis and male sterility in pepper. Conclusions In summary, we systematically characterized the phylogeny, classification, structure, and expression of the CaWD40 gene family in pepper. Our findings provide a valuable foundation for further functional investigations on WD40 genes in pepper.
Background: Characterization of regulatory variants (e.g., gene expression quantitative trait loci, eQTL; gene splicing QTL, sQTL) is crucial for biologically interpreting molecular mechanisms underlying loci associated with complex traits. However, regulatory variants in dairy cattle, particularly in specific biological contexts (e.g., distinct lactation stages), remain largely unknown. In this study, we explored regulatory variants in whole blood samples collected during early to mid-lactation (22-150 days after calving) of 101 Holstein cows and analyzed them to decipher the regulatory mechanisms underlying complex traits in dairy cattle. Results: We identified 14,303 genes and 227,705 intron clusters expressed in the white blood cells of 101 cattle. The average heritability of gene expression and intron excision ratio explained by cis-SNPs is 0.28 +/- 0.13 and 0.25 +/- 0.13, respectively. We identified 23,485 SNP-gene expression pairs and 18,166 SNP-intron cluster pairs in dairy cattle during early to mid-lactation. Compared with the 2,380,457 cis-eQTLs reported to be present in blood in the Cattle Genotype-Tissue Expression atlas (CattleGTEx), only 6,114 cis-eQTLs (P < 0.05) were detected in the present study. By conducting colocalization analysis between cis-e/sQTL and the results of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) from four traits, we identified a cis-e/sQTL (rs109421300) of the DGAT1 gene that might be a key marker in early to mid-lactation for milk yield, fat yield, protein yield, and somatic cell score (PP4 > 0.6). Finally, transcriptome-wide association studies (TWAS) revealed certain genes (e.g., FAM83H and TBC1D17) whose expression in white blood cells was significantly (P < 0.05) associated with complex traits. Conclusions: This study investigated the genetic regulation of gene expression and alternative splicing in dairy cows during early to mid-lactation and provided new insights into the regulatory mechanisms underlying complex traits of economic importance.
In every omics experiment, genes or their products are identified for which even state of the art tools are unable to assign a function. In the biotechnology chassis organism Pseudomonas putida, these proteins of unknown function make up 14% of the proteome. This missing information can bias analyses since these proteins can carry out functions which impact the engineering of organisms. As a consequence of predicting protein function across all organisms, function prediction tools generally fail to use all of the types of data available for any specific organism, including protein and transcript expression information. Additionally, the release of Alphafold predictions for all Uniprot proteins provides a novel opportunity for leveraging structural information. We constructed a bespoke machine learning model to predict the function of recalcitrant proteins of unknown function in Pseudomonas putida based on these sources of data, which annotated 1079 terms to 213 proteins. Among the predicted functions supplied by the model, we found evidence for a significant overrepresentation of nitrogen metabolism and macromolecule processing proteins. These findings were corroborated by manual analyses of selected proteins which identified, among others, a functionally unannotated operon that likely encodes a branch of the shikimate pathway.
Strong and shifting selective pressures of the Anthropocene are rapidly shaping phenomes and genomes of organisms worldwide. Crops expressing pesticidal proteins from Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) represent one major selective force on insect genomes. Here we characterize a rapid response to selection by Bt crops in a major crop pest, Helicoverpa zea. We reveal the polygenic architecture of Bt resistance evolution in H. zea and identify multiple genomic regions underlying this trait. In the genomic region of largest effect, we identified a gene amplification event, where resistant individuals showed variation in copy number for multiple genes. Signals of this amplification increased over time, consistent with the history of field-evolved Bt resistance evolution. Modern wild populations from disparate geographical regions are positive for this variant at high, but not fixed, allele frequencies. We also detected selection against single copy variants at this locus in wild H. zea collected from Bt expressing plants, further supporting its role in resistance. Multiple genes were annotated in this genomic region, and all appeared to be significantly upregulated in Bt resistant H. zea. We functionally characterized genes within the copy number variant (CNV), providing insight into their potential roles in resistance evolution. Our findings reveal the nature of rapid genome evolution in a major crop pest following anthropogenic selection and highlight the role that CNVs can have in rapid evolutionary responses.
Background Lablab is one of the conventionally grown multi-purpose crops that originated in Africa. It is an annual or short-lived perennial forage legume which has versatile uses (as a vegetable and dry seeds, as food or feed, or as green manure) but is yet to receive adequate research attention and hence remains underexploited. To develop new and highly productive lablab varieties, using genomics-assisted selection, the present study aimed to identify quantitative trait loci associated with agronomically important traits in lablab and to assess the stability of these traits across two different agro-ecologies in Ethiopia. Here, we resequenced one hundred and forty-two lablab accessions, utilised whole genome genotyping approaches, and conducted multi-locational phenotyping over two years.
BackgroundSingle-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has been widely applied to dissect cellular heterogeneity in normal and diseased skin. Sebaceous glands, essential skin components with established functions in maintaining skin integrity and emerging roles in systemic energy metabolism, have been largely neglected in scRNA-seq studies.MethodsDeparting from mouse and human skin scRNA-seq datasets, we identified gene sets expressed especially in sebaceous glands with the open-source R-package oposSOM.ResultsThe identified gene sets included sebaceous gland-typical genes as Scd3, Mgst1, Cidea, Awat2 and KRT7. Surprisingly, however, there was not a single overlap among the 100 highest, exclusively in sebaceous glands expressed transcripts in mouse and human samples. Notably, both species share a common core of only 25 transcripts, including mitochondrial and peroxisomal genes involved in fatty acid, amino acid, and glucose processing, thus highlighting the intense metabolic rate of this gland.ConclusionsThis study highlights intrinsic differences in sebaceous lipid synthesis between mice and humans, and indicates an important role for peroxisomal processes in this context. Our data also provides attractive starting points for experimentally addressing novel candidates regulating sebaceous gland homeostasis.
BackgroundAt a global scale, the SARS-CoV-2 virus did not remain in its initial genotype for a long period of time, with the first global reports of variants of concern (VOCs) in late 2020. Subsequently, genome sequencing has become an indispensable tool for characterizing the ongoing pandemic, particularly for typing SARS-CoV-2 samples obtained from patients or environmental surveillance. For such SARS-CoV-2 typing, various in vitro and in silico workflows exist, yet to date, no systematic cross-platform validation has been reported.ResultsIn this work, we present the first comprehensive cross-platform evaluation and validation of in silico SARS-CoV-2 typing workflows. The evaluation relies on a dataset of 54 patient-derived samples sequenced with several different in vitro approaches on all relevant state-of-the-art sequencing platforms. Moreover, we present UnCoVar, a robust, production-grade reproducible SARS-CoV-2 typing workflow that outperforms all other tested approaches in terms of precision and recall.ConclusionsIn many ways, the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has accelerated the development of techniques and analytical approaches. We believe that this can serve as a blueprint for dealing with future pandemics. Accordingly, UnCoVar is easily generalizable towards other viral pathogens and future pandemics. The fully automated workflow assembles virus genomes from patient samples, identifies existing lineages, and provides high-resolution insights into individual mutations. UnCoVar includes extensive quality control and automatically generates interactive visual reports. UnCoVar is implemented as a Snakemake workflow. The open-source code is available under a BSD 2-clause license at github.com/IKIM-Essen/uncovar.
BackgroundThe nervous system is central to coordinating behavioural responses to environmental change, likely including ocean acidification (OA). However, a clear understanding of neurobiological responses to OA is lacking, especially for marine invertebrates.ResultsWe evaluated the transcriptomic response of the central nervous system (CNS) and eyes of the two-toned pygmy squid (Idiosepius pygmaeus) to OA conditions, using a de novo transcriptome assembly created with long read PacBio ISO-sequencing data. We then correlated patterns of gene expression with CO2 treatment levels and OA-affected behaviours in the same individuals. OA induced transcriptomic responses within the nervous system related to various different types of neurotransmission, neuroplasticity, immune function and oxidative stress. These molecular changes may contribute to OA-induced behavioural changes, as suggested by correlations among gene expression profiles, CO2 treatment and OA-affected behaviours.ConclusionsThis study provides the first molecular insights into the neurobiological effects of OA on a cephalopod and correlates molecular changes with whole animal behavioural responses, helping to bridge the gaps in our knowledge between environmental change and animal responses.
BackgroundCompatibility between plant parasites and their hosts is genetically determined {Citation}both interacting organisms. For example, plants may carry resistance (R) genes or deploy chemical defences. Aphid saliva contains many proteins that are secreted into host tissues. Subsets of these proteins are predicted to act as effectors, either subverting or triggering host immunity. However, associating particular effectors with virulence or avirulence outcomes presents challenges due to the combinatorial complexity. Here we use defined aphid and host genetics to test for co-segregation of expressed aphid transcripts and proteins with virulent or avirulent phenotypes.ResultsWe compared virulent and avirulent pea aphid parental genotypes, and their bulk segregant F1 progeny on Medicago truncatula genotypes carrying or lacking the RAP1 (Resistance to Acyrthosiphon pisum 1) resistance quantitative trait locus. Differential gene expression analysis of whole body and head samples, in combination with proteomics of saliva and salivary glands, enabled us to pinpoint proteins associated with virulence or avirulence phenotypes. There was relatively little impact of host genotype, whereas large numbers of transcripts and proteins were differentially expressed between parental aphids, likely a reflection of their classification as divergent biotypes within the pea aphid species complex. Many fewer transcripts intersected with the equivalent differential expression patterns in the bulked F1 progeny, providing an effective filter for removing genomic background effects. Overall, there were more upregulated genes detected in the F1 avirulent dataset compared with the virulent one. Some genes were differentially expressed both in the transcriptome and in the proteome datasets, with aminopeptidase N proteins being the most frequent differentially expressed family. In addition, a substantial proportion (27%) of salivary proteins lack annotations, suggesting that many novel functions remain to be discovered.ConclusionsEspecially when combined with tightly controlled genetics of both insect and host plant, multi-omics approaches are powerful tools for revealing and filtering candidate lists down to plausible genes for further functional analysis as putative aphid effectors.
Background The Qinghai Tibetan sheep, a local breed renowned for its long hair, has experienced significant deterioration in wool characteristics due to the absence of systematic breeding practices. Therefore, it is imperative to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying follicle development in order to genetically enhance wool-related traits and safeguard the sustainable utilization of valuable germplasm resources. However, our understanding of the regulatory roles played by coding and non-coding RNAs in hair follicle development remains largely elusive.Results A total of 20,874 mRNAs, 25,831 circRNAs, 4087 lncRNAs, and 794 miRNAs were annotated. Among them, we identified 58 DE lncRNAs, 325 DE circRNAs, 924 DE mRNAs, and 228 DE miRNAs during the development of medullary primary hair follicle development. GO and KEGG functional enrichment analyses revealed that the JAK-STAT, TGF-beta, Hedgehog, PPAR, cGMP-PKG signaling pathway play crucial roles in regulating fibroblast and epithelial development during skin and hair follicle induction. Furthermore, the interactive network analysis additionally identified several crucial mRNA, circRNA, and lncRNA molecules associated with the process of primary hair follicle development. Ultimately, by investigating DEmir's role in the ceRNA regulatory network mechanism, we identified 113 circRNA-miRNA pairs and 14 miRNA-mRNA pairs, including IGF2BP1-miR-23-x-novel-circ-01998-MSTRG.7111.3, DPT-miR-370-y-novel-circ-005802-MSTRG.14857.1 and TSPEAR-oar-miR-370-3p-novel-circ-005802- MSTRG.10527.1.Conclusions Our study offers novel insights into the distinct expression patterns of various transcription types during hair follicle morphogenesis, establishing a solid foundation for unraveling the molecular mechanisms that drive hair development and providing a scientific basis for selectively breeding desirable wool-related traits in this specific breed.
BackgroundOutbreaks of the coral predator Crown-of-Thorns Starfish (CoTS) pose a severe threat to coral reefs in the Indo-Pacific Ocean. In 2018, the South China Sea (SCS) experienced significant CoTS outbreaks, leading to extensive coral mortality across the Xisha, Zhongsha, Dongsha, and Nansha Islands, severely impacting the coral reef ecosystem.ResultsTo explore the origins of these outbreaks, we conducted a comprehensive genomic analysis using data from genomic single nucleotide polymorphism sites (SNPs) and mitochondrial haplotypes. Our analysis reveals that CoTS populations in the SCS, which exhibit moderate genetic diversity and may have undergone positive selection or population expansion. There was limited genetic differentiation among CoTS populations from XS, ZS, and NS groups. Especially between the XS and ZS groups, there was almost no genetic differentiation. The populations from XS, ZS, and NS groups have strong genetic connections with populations in Vietnam and the Philippines. There was high gene flow from Vietnam to the Xisha Islands and from the Philippines to the Nansha Islands, suggesting that the CoTS populations in these regions primarily originate from these neighboring countries.ConclusionThe comprehensive analyses of SNP and mitochondrial genomes have provided valuable insights into the population genetics of CoTS. This research has generated significant genomic resources and facilitated important studies on the genetics of the CoTS species. By identifying potential source populations and understanding the genetic basis of their spread, managers can develop more effective conservation strategies to protect vulnerable coral reef ecosystems in the SCS.
BackgroundThe placenta is essential for nutrient exchange and hormone production between the mother and the developing fetus and serves as an invaluable model for epigenetic research. Most epigenetic studies of the human placenta have used whole placentas from term pregnancies and have identified the presence of partially methylated domains (PMDs). However, the origin of these domains, which are typically absent in most somatic cells, remains unclear in the placental context.ResultsUsing whole-genome bisulfite sequencing and analysis of histone H3 modifications, we generated epigenetic profiles of human cytotrophoblasts during the first trimester and at term, as well as human trophoblast stem cells. Our study focused specifically on PMDs. We found that genomic regions likely to form PMDs are resistant to global DNA demethylation during trophectoderm reprogramming, and that PMDs arise through a slow methylation process within condensed chromatin near the nuclear lamina. In addition, we found significant differences in histone H3 modifications between PMDs in cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast stem cells.ConclusionsOur findings suggest that spatiotemporal genomic features shape megabase-scale DNA methylation patterns, including PMDs, in the human placenta and highlight distinct differences in PMDs between human cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast stem cells. These findings advance our understanding of placental biology and provide a basis for further research into human development and related diseases.
Background Genome-wide DNA demethylation occurs in mammalian primordial germ cells (PGCs) as part of the epigenetic reprogramming important for gametogenesis and resetting the epigenetic information for totipotency. Dppa3 (also known as Stella or Pgc7) is highly expressed in mouse PGCs and oocytes and encodes a factor essential for female fertility. It prevents excessive DNA methylation in oocytes and ensures proper gene expression in preimplantation embryos: however, its role in PGCs is largely unexplored. In the present study, we investigated whether or not DPPA3 has an impact on CG methylation/demethylation in mouse PGCs.Results We show that DPPA3 plays a role in genome-wide demethylation in PGCs even before sex differentiation. Dppa3 knockout female PGCs show aberrant hypermethylation, most predominantly at H3K9me3-marked retrotransposons, which persists up to the fully-grown oocyte stage. DPPA3 works downstream of PRDM14, a master regulator of epigenetic reprogramming in embryonic stem cells and PGCs, and independently of TET1, an enzyme that hydroxylates 5-methylcytosine.Conclusions The results suggest that DPPA3 facilitates DNA demethylation through a replication-coupled passive mechanism in PGCs. Our study identifies DPPA3 as a novel epigenetic reprogramming factor in mouse PGCs.
BackgroundThe common Eastern bumble bee Bombus impatiens is native to North America and is the main commercially reared pollinator in the Americas. There has been extensive research on this species related to its social biology, applied pollination, and genetics. The genome of this species was previously sequenced using short-read technology, but recent technological advances provide an opportunity for substantial improvements. This species is common in agricultural and urban environments, and heavy metal contaminants produced by industrial processes can negatively impact it. To begin to identify possible mechanisms underlying responses to these toxins, we used RNA-sequencing to examine how exposure to a cocktail of four heavy metals at field-realistic levels from industrial areas affected B. impatiens worker gene expression.ResultsPacBio long-read sequencing resulted in 544x coverage of the genome, and HiC technology was used to map chromatin contacts. Using Juicer and manual curation, the genome was scaffolded into 18 main pseudomolecules, representing a high quality, chromosome-level assembly. The sequenced genome size is 266.6 Mb and BRAKER3 annotation produced 13,938 annotated genes. The genome and annotation show high completeness, with >= 96% of conserved Eukaryota and Hymenoptera genes present in both the assembly and annotated genes. RNA sequencing of heavy metal exposed workers revealed 603 brain and 34 fat body differentially expressed genes. In the brain, differentially expressed genes had biological functions related to chaperone activity and protein folding.ConclusionsOur data represent a large improvement in genomic resources for this important model species-with 10% more genome coverage than previously available, and a high-quality assembly into 18 chromosomes, the expected karyotype for this species. The new gene annotation added 777 new genes. Altered gene expression in response to heavy metal exposure suggests a possible mechanism for how these urban toxins are negatively impacting bee health, specifically by altering protein folding in the brain. Overall, these data are useful as a general high quality genomic resource for this species, and provide insight into mechanisms underlying tissue-specific toxicological responses of bumble bees to heavy metals.
Background Venoms have evolved independently over a hundred times in the animal kingdom to deter predators and/or subdue prey. Venoms are cocktails of various secreted toxins, whose origin and diversification provide an appealing system for evolutionary researchers. Previous studies of the ant venom of Tetramorium bicarinatum revealed several Myrmicitoxin (MYRTX) peptides that gathered into seven precursor families suggesting different evolutionary origins. Analysis of the T. bicarinatum genome enabling further genomic approaches was necessary to understand the processes underlying the evolution of these myrmicitoxins.Results Here, we sequenced the genome of Tetramorium bicarinatum and reported the organisation of 44 venom peptide genes (vpg). Of the eleven chromosomes that make up the genome of T. bicarinatum, four carry the vpg which are organized in tandem repeats. This organisation together with the ML evolutionary analysis of vpg sequences, is consistent with evolution by local duplication of ancestral genes for each precursor family. The structure of the vpg into two or three exons is conserved after duplication events while the promoter regions are the least conserved parts of the vpg even for genes with highly identical sequences. This suggests that enhancer sequences were not involved in duplication events, but were recruited from surrounding regions. Expression level analysis revealed that most vpg are highly expressed in venom glands, although one gene or group of genes is much more highly expressed in each family. Finally, the examination of the genomic data revealed that several genes encoding transcription factors (TFs) are highly expressed in the venom glands. The search for binding sites (BS) of these TFs in the vpg promoters revealed hot spots of GATA sites in several vpg families.Conclusion In this pioneering investigation on ant venom genes, we provide a high-quality assembly genome and the annotation of venom peptide genes that we think can fosters further genomic research to understand the evolutionary history of ant venom biochemistry.
Background Although, oocytes from prepubertal donors are known to be less developmentally competent than those from adult donors it does not restrain their ability to produce full-term pregnancies. The transcriptomic profile of embryos could be used as a predictor for embryo's individual developmental competence. The aim of the study was to compare transcriptomic profile of blastocysts derived from prepubertal and pubertal heifers oocytes. Bovine cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs) were obtained by ovum pick- up method from prepubertal and pubertal heifers. After in vitro maturation COCs were fertilized and cultured to the blastocyst stage. Total RNA was isolated from both groups of blastocysts and RNA-seq was performed. Gene ontology analysis was performed by DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery).Results A higher average blastocyst rate was obtained in the pubertal than in the pre-pubertal group. There were no differences in the quality of blastocysts between the examined groups. We identified 436 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between blastocysts derived from researched groups, of which 247 DEGs were downregulated in blastocysts derived from pubertal compared to prepubertal heifers oocytes, and 189 DEGs were upregulated. The genes involved in mitochondrial function, including oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) were found to be different in studied groups using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes (KEGG) pathway analysis and 8 of those DEGs were upregulated and 1 was downregulated in blastocysts derived from pubertal compared to prepubertal heifers oocytes. DEGs associated with mitochondrial function were found: ATP synthases (ATP5MF-ATP synthase membrane subunit f, ATP5PD- ATP synthase peripheral stalk subunit d, ATP12A- ATPase H+/K + transporting non-gastric alpha2 subunit), NADH dehydrogenases (NDUFS3- NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit core subunit S3, NDUFA13- NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit A13, NDUFA3- NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit A3), cytochrome c oxidase (COX17), cytochrome c somatic (CYCS) and ubiquinol cytochrome c reductase core protein 1 (UQCRC1). We found lower number of apoptotic cells in blastocysts derived from oocytes collected from prepubertal than those obtained from pubertal donors.Conclusions Despite decreased expression of genes associated with OXPHOS pathway in blastocysts from prepubertal heifers oocytes, the increased level of ATP12A together with the lower number of apoptotic cells in these blastocysts might support their survival after transfer.
Indian Mustard (Brassica juncea L.) is a globally cultivated winter oilseed crop of the rapeseed-mustard group. It is predominantly grown in the semi-arid northwest agroclimatic zone of India, characterized by high soil salinity. Enhancing tolerance to salt stress in B. juncea is therefore crucial for sustaining its production in this region. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play critical roles in coordinating gene expression under various abiotic stresses, including salt stress, but their involvement in the salt stress response in B. juncea remains largely unknown. In this study, we conducted RNA-seq analysis on control, salt-stressed, and salt-shocked young leaves of the salt-tolerant B. juncea cv CS-52. We identified a total of 3,602 differentially expressed transcripts between stress versus control and shock versus control samples. Among these, 61 were identified as potential lncRNAs, with 21 specific to salt stress and 40 specific to salt shock. Of the 21 lncRNAs specific to salt stress, 15 were upregulated and six were downregulated, while all 40 lncRNAs unique to salt shock were downregulated. Chromosomal distribution analysis of the lncRNAs revealed their uneven placement across 18 chromosomes in B. juncea. RNA-RNA interaction analysis between salt stress-upregulated lncRNAs and salt stress-related miRNAs identified 26 interactions between 10 lncRNAs and 23 miRNAs and predicted 13 interactions between six miRNAs and 13 mRNAs. Finally, six lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA interaction networks were established, involving five lncRNAs, 13 miRNAs, and 23 mRNAs. RT-qPCR analysis revealed the upregulation of four out of five lncRNAs, along with their target mRNAs, supporting their involvement in the salt stress response in B. juncea.
BackgroundCertain structural variants (SVs) including large-scale genetic copy number variants, as well as copy number-neutral inversions and translocations may not all be resolved by chromosome karyotype studies. The identification of genetic risk factors for Parkinson's disease (PD) has been primarily focused on the gene-disruptive single nucleotide variants. In contrast, larger SVs, which may significantly influence human phenotypes, have been largely underexplored. Optical genomic mapping (OGM) represents a novel approach that offers greater sensitivity and resolution for detecting SVs. In this study, we used induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines of patients with PD-linked SNCA and PRKN variants as a proof of concept to (i) show the detection of pathogenic SVs in PD with OGM and (ii) provide a comprehensive screening of genetic abnormalities in iPSCs.ResultsOGM detected SNCA gene triplication and duplication in patient-derived iPSC lines, which were not identified by long-read sequencing. Additionally, various exon deletions were confirmed by OGM in the PRKN gene of iPSCs, of which exon 3-5 and exon 2 deletions were unable to phase with conventional multiplex-ligation-dependent probe amplification. In terms of chromosomal abnormalities in iPSCs, no gene fusions, no aneuploidy but two balanced inter-chromosomal translocations were detected in one line that were absent in the parental fibroblasts and not identified by routine single nucleotide variant karyotyping.ConclusionsIn summary, OGM can detect pathogenic SVs in PD-linked genes as well as reveal genomic abnormalities for iPSCs that were not identified by other techniques, which is supportive for OGM's future use in gene discovery and iPSC line screening.
BackgroundAs a nexus of routine antibiotic use and zoonotic pathogen presence, the livestock farming environment is a potential hotspot for the emergence of zoonotic diseases and antibiotic resistant bacteria. Livestock can further facilitate disease transmission by serving as intermediary hosts for pathogens before a spillover event. In light of this, we aimed to characterize the microbiomes and resistomes of dairy workers, whose exposure to the livestock farming environment places them at risk for facilitating community transmission of antibiotic resistant genes and emerging zoonotic diseases.ResultsUsing shotgun sequencing, we investigated differences in the taxonomy, diversity and gene presence of 10 dairy farm workers and 6 community controls' gut metagenomes, contextualizing these samples with additional publicly available gut metagenomes. We found no significant differences in the prevalence of resistance genes, virulence factors, or taxonomic composition between the two groups. The lack of statistical significance may be attributed, in part, to the limited sample size of our study or the potential similarities in exposures between the dairy workers and community controls. We did, however, observe patterns warranting further investigation including greater abundance of tetracycline resistance genes and prevalence of cephamycin resistance genes as well as lower average gene diversity (even after accounting for differential sequencing depth) in dairy workers' metagenomes. We also found evidence of commensal organism association with tetracycline resistance genes in both groups (including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Ligilactobacillus animalis, and Simiaoa sunii).ConclusionsThis study highlights the utility of shotgun metagenomics in examining the microbiomes and resistomes of livestock workers, focusing on a cohort of dairy workers in the United States. While our study revealed no statistically significant differences between groups in taxonomy, diversity and gene presence, we observed patterns in antibiotic resistance gene abundance and prevalence that align with findings from previous studies of livestock workers in China and Europe. Our results lay the groundwork for future research involving larger cohorts of dairy and non-dairy workers to better understand the impact of occupational exposure to livestock farming on the microbiomes and resistomes of workers.
Background Approximately 95% of samples analyzed in univariate genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are of European ancestry. This bias toward European ancestry populations in association screening also exists for other analyses and methods that are often developed and tested on European ancestry only. However, existing data in non-European populations, which are often of modest sample size, could benefit from innovative approaches as recently illustrated in the context of polygenic risk scores.Methods Here, we extend and assess the potential limitations and gains of our multi-trait GWAS pipeline, JASS (Joint Analysis of Summary Statistics), for the analysis of non-European ancestries. To this end, we conducted the joint GWAS of 19 hematological traits and glycemic traits across five ancestries (European (EUR), admixed American (AMR), African (AFR), East Asian (EAS), and South-East Asian (SAS)).Results We detected 367 new genome-wide significant associations in non-European populations (15 in Admixed American (AMR), 72 in African (AFR) and 280 in East Asian (EAS)). New associations detected represent 5%, 17% and 13% of associations in the AFR, AMR and EAS populations, respectively. Overall, multi-trait testing increases the replication of European associated loci in non-European ancestry by 15%. Pleiotropic effects were highly similar at significant loci across ancestries (e.g. the mean correlation between multi-trait genetic effects of EUR and EAS ancestries was 0.88). For hematological traits, strong discrepancies in multi-trait genetic effects are tied to known evolutionary divergences: the ARKC1 loci, which is adaptive to overcome p.vivax induced malaria.Conclusions Multi-trait GWAS can be a valuable tool to narrow the genetic knowledge gap between European and non-European populations.
BackgroundNovel technologies are needed to combat anopheline vectors of malaria parasites as the reductions in worldwide disease incidence has stalled in recent years. Gene drive-based approaches utilizing Cas9/guide RNA (gRNA) systems are being developed to suppress anopheline populations or modify them by increasing their refractoriness to the parasites. These systems rely on the successful cleavage of a chromosomal DNA target site followed by homology-directed repair (HDR) in germline cells to bias inheritance of the drive system. An optimal drive system should be highly efficient for HDR-mediated gene conversion with minimal error rates. A gene-drive system, AgNosCd-1, with these attributes has been developed in the Anopheles gambiae G3 strain and serves as a framework for further development of population modification strains. To validate AgNosCd-1 as a versatile platform, it must perform well in a variety of genetic backgrounds.ResultsWe introduced or introgressed AgNosCd-1 into different genetic backgrounds, three in geographically-diverse Anopheles gambiae strains, and one each in an An. coluzzii and An. arabiensis strain. The overall drive inheritance, determined by presence of a dominant marker gene in the F2 hybrids, far exceeded Mendelian inheritance ratios in all genetic backgrounds that produced viable progeny. Haldane's rule was confirmed for AgNosCd-1 introgression into the An. arabiensis Dongola strain and sterility of the F1 hybrid males prevented production of F2 hybrid offspring. Back-crosses of F1 hybrid females were not performed to keep the experimental design consistent across all the genetic backgrounds and to avoid maternally-generated mutant alleles that might confound the drive dynamics. DNA sequencing of the target site in F1 and F2 mosquitoes with exceptional phenotypes revealed drive system-generated mutations resulting from non-homologous end joining events (NHEJ), which formed at rates similar to AgNosCd-1 in the G3 genetic background and were generated via the same maternal-effect mechanism.ConclusionsThese findings support the conclusion that the AgNosCd-1 drive system is robust and has high drive inheritance and gene conversion efficiency accompanied by low NHEJ mutation rates in diverse An. gambiae s.l. laboratory strains.
Disease can act as a driving force in shaping genetic makeup across populations, even species, if the impacts influence a particularly sensitive part of their life cycles. White-nose disease is caused by a fungal pathogen infecting bats during hibernation. The mycosis has caused massive population declines of susceptible species in North America, particularly in the genus Myotis. However, Myotis bats appear to tolerate infection in Eurasia, where the fungal pathogen has co-evolved with its bat hosts for an extended period of time. Therefore, with susceptible and tolerant populations, the fungal disease provides a unique opportunity to tease apart factors contributing to tolerance at a genomic level to and gain an understanding of the evolution of non-harmful in host-parasite interactions. To investigate if the fungal disease has caused adaptation on a genomic level in Eurasian bat species, we adopted both whole-genome sequencing approaches and a literature search to compile a set of 300 genes from which to investigate signals of positive selection in genomes of 11 Eurasian bats at the codon-level. Our results indicate significant positive selection in 38 genes, many of which have a marked role in responses to infection. Our findings suggest that white-nose syndrome may have applied a significant selective pressure on Eurasian Myotis-bats in the past, which can contribute their survival in co-existence with the pathogen. Our findings provide an insight on the selective pressure pathogens afflict on their hosts using methodology that can be adapted to other host-pathogen study systems.
Background Parasitic nematodes, significant pathogens for humans, animals, and plants, depend on diverse organ systems for intra-host survival. Understanding the cellular diversity and molecular variations underlying these functions holds promise for developing novel therapeutics, with specific emphasis on the neuromuscular system's functional diversity. The nematode intestine, crucial for anthelmintic therapies, exhibits diverse cellular phenotypes, and unraveling this diversity at the single-cell level is essential for advancing knowledge in anthelmintic research across various organ systems.Results Here, using novel single-cell transcriptomics datasets, we delineate cellular diversity within the intestine of adult female Ascaris suum, a parasitic nematode species that infects animals and people. Gene transcripts expressed in individual nuclei of untreated intestinal cells resolved three phenotypic clusters, while lower stringency resolved additional subclusters and more potential diversity. Clusters 1 and 3 phenotypes displayed variable congruence with scRNA phenotypes of C. elegans intestinal cells, whereas the A. suum cluster 2 phenotype was markedly unique. Distinct functional pathway enrichment characterized each A. suum intestinal cell cluster. Cluster 2 was distinctly enriched for Clade III-associated genes, suggesting it evolved within clade III nematodes. Clusters also demonstrated differential transcriptional responsiveness to nematode intestinal toxic treatments, with Cluster 2 displaying the least responses to short-term intra-pseudocoelomic nematode intestinal toxin treatments.Conclusions This investigation presents advances in knowledge related to biological differences among major cell populations of adult A. suum intestinal cells. For the first time, diverse nematode intestinal cell populations were characterized, and associated biological markers of these cells were identified to support tracking of constituent cells under experimental conditions. These advances will promote better understanding of this and other parasitic nematodes of global importance, and will help to guide future anthelmintic treatments.
BackgroundAs precision medicine advances, polygenic scores (PGS) have become increasingly important for clinical risk assessment. Many methods have been developed to create polygenic models with increased accuracy for risk prediction. Our select and shrink with summary statistics (S4) PGS method has previously been shown to accurately predict the polygenic risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. Here, we applied S4 PGS to 12 phenotypes for UK Biobank participants, and compared it with the LDpred2 and a combined S4 + LDpred2 method.ResultsThe S4 + LDpred2 method provided overall improved PGS accuracy across a variety of phenotypes for UK Biobank participants. Additionally, the S4 + LDpred2 method had the best estimated PGS accuracy in Finnish and Japanese populations. We also addressed the challenge of limited genotype level data by developing the PGS models using only GWAS summary statistics.ConclusionsTaken together, the S4 + LDpred2 method represents an improvement in overall PGS accuracy across multiple phenotypes and populations.
Drought stress poses a critical threat to global crop yields and sustainable agriculture. The GASA genes are recognized for their pivotal role in stress tolerance and plant growth, but little is known about how they function in sunflowers. The investigation aimed to identify and elucidate the role of HaGASA genes in conferring sunflowers with drought tolerance. Twenty-seven different HaGASA gene family members were found in this study that were inconsistently located across eleven sunflower chromosomes. Phylogeny analysis revealed that the sunflower HaGASA genes were divided into five subgroups by comparing GASA genes with those from Arabidopsis, peanut, and soybean, with members within each subgroup displaying similar conserved motifs and gene structures. In-silico evaluation of cis-regulatory elements indicated the existence of specific elements associated with stress-responsiveness being the most abundant, followed by hormone, light, and growth-responsive elements. Transcriptomic data from the NCBI database was utilized to assess the HaGASA genes expression profile in different sunflower varieties under drought conditions. The HaGASA genes expression across ten sunflower genotypes under drought stress, revealed 14 differentially expressed HaGASA genes, implying their active role in the plant's stress response. The expression in different organs revealed that HaGASA2, HaGASA11, HaGASA17, HaGASA19, HaGASA21 and HaGASA26 displayed maximum expression in the stem. Our findings implicate HaGASA genes in mediating sunflower growth maintenance and adaptation to abiotic stress, particularly drought. The findings, taken together, provided a basic understanding of the structure and potential functions of HaGASA genes, setting the framework for further functional investigations into their roles in drought stress mitigation and crop improvement strategies.
Background Klebsiella pneumoniae, a notorious pathogen for causing nosocomial infections has become a major cause of neonatal septicemia, leading to high morbidity and mortality worldwide. This opportunistic bacterium has become highly resistant to antibiotics due to the widespread acquisition of genes encoding a variety of enzymes such as extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) and carbapenemases. We collected Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates from a local tertiary care hospital from February 2019-February 2021. To gain molecular insight into the resistome, virulome, and genetic environment of significant genes of multidrug-resistant K. pneumoniae isolates, we performed the short-read whole-genome sequencing of 10 K. pneumoniae isolates recovered from adult patients, neonates, and hospital tap water samples. Results The draft genomes of the isolates varied in size, ranging from 5.48 to 5.96 Mbp suggesting the genome plasticity of this pathogen. Various genes conferring resistance to different classes of antibiotics e.g., aminoglycosides, quinolones, sulfonamides, tetracycline, and trimethoprim were identified in all sequenced isolates. The highest resistance was observed towards carbapenems, which has been putatively linked to the presence of both class B and class D carbapenemases, blaNDM, and blaOXA, respectively. Moreover, the biocide resistance gene qacEdelta1 was found in 6/10 of the sequenced strains. The sequenced isolates exhibited a broad range of sequence types and capsular types. The significant antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) were bracketed by a variety of mobile genetic elements (MGEs). Various spontaneous mutations in genes other than the acquired antibiotic-resistance genes were observed, which play an indirect role in making these bugs resistant to antibiotics. Loss or deficiency of outer membrane porins, combined with ESBL production, played a significant role in carbapenem resistance in our sequenced isolates. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the study isolates exhibited evolutionary relationships with strains from China, India, and the USA suggesting a shared evolutionary history and potential dissemination of similar genes amongst the isolates of different origins. Conclusions This study provides valuable insight into the presence of multiple mechanisms of carbapenem resistance in K. pneumoniae strains including the acquisition of multiple antibiotic-resistance genes through mobile genetic elements. Identification of rich mobilome yielded insightful information regarding the crucial role of insertion sequences, transposons, and integrons in shaping the genome of bacteria for the transmission of various resistance-associated genes. Multi-drug resistant isolates that had the fewest resistance genes exhibited a significant number of mutations. K. pneumoniae isolate from water source displayed comparable antibiotic resistance determinants to clinical isolates and the highest number of virulence-associated genes suggesting the possible interplay of ARGs amongst bacteria from different sources.
Dairy industries apply selected lactococcal strains and mixed cultures to produce diverse fermented products with distinctive flavor and texture properties. Innovation of the starter culture functionality in cheese applications embraces natural biodiversity of the Lactococcus species to identify novel strains with alternative flavor or texture forming capacities and/or increased processing robustness and phage resistance. Mobile genetic elements (MGE), like integrative conjugative elements (ICEs) play an important role in shaping the biodiversity of bacteria. Besides the genes involved in the conjugation of ICEs from donor to recipient strains, these elements also harbor cargo genes that encode a wide range of functions. The definition of such cargo genes can only be achieved by accurate identification of the ICE boundaries (delimiting). Here, we delimited 25 ICEs in lactococcal genome sequences with low contig numbers using insertion-sites flanking single-copy core-genome genes as markers for each of the distinct ICE-integrases we identified previously within the conserved ICE-core genes. For ICEs in strains for which genome information with large numbers of contigs is available, we exemplify that CRISPR-Cas9 driven ICE-curing, followed by resequencing, allows accurate delimitation and cargo definition of ICEs. Finally, we compare and contrast the cargo gene repertoire of the 26 delimited lactococcal ICEs, identifying high plasticity among the cargo of lactococccal ICEs and a range of encoded functions that is of apparent industrial interest, including restriction modification, abortive infection, and stress adaptation genes.
Lactococcus lactis is widely applied by the dairy industry for the fermentation of milk into products such as cheese. Adaptation of L. lactis to the dairy environment often depends on functions encoded by mobile genetic elements (MGEs) such as plasmids. Other L. lactis MGEs that contribute to industrially relevant traits like antimicrobial production and carbohydrate utilization capacities belong to the integrative conjugative elements (ICE). Here we investigate the prevalence of ICEs in L. lactis using an automated search engine that detects colocalized, ICE-associated core-functions (involved in conjugation or mobilization) in lactococcal genomes. This approach enabled the detection of 36 candidate-ICEs in 69 L. lactis genomes. By phylogenetic analysis of conserved protein functions encoded in all lactococcal ICEs, these 36 ICEs could be classified in three main ICE-families that encompass 7 distinguishable ICE-integrases and are characterized by apparent modular-exchangeability and plasticity. Finally, we demonstrate that phylogenetic analysis of the conjugation-associated VirB4 ATPase function differentiates ICE- and plasmid-derived conjugation systems, indicating that conjugal transfer of lactococcal ICEs and plasmids involves genetically distinct machineries. Our genomic analysis and sequence-based classification of lactococcal ICEs creates a comprehensive overview of the conserved functional repertoires encoded by this family of MGEs in L. lactis, which can facilitate the future exploitation of the functional traits they encode by ICE mobilization to appropriate starter culture strains.
Elsino & euml; species are phytopathogenic fungi that cause serious scab diseases on economically important plants. The disease symptoms arise from the effects of a group of phytotoxins known as elsinochromes, produced via a type-I polyketide synthase (PKS) biosynthetic pathway. The elsinochrome gene cluster was first annotated in Elsino & euml; fawcettii where the main type-I PKS gene was characterized as EfPKS1. A later study showed that this gene and the associated cluster had not been correctly annotated, and that EfPKS1 was actually the anchor gene of the melanin biosynthetic pathway. A new type-I PKS gene EfETB1 associated with elsinochrome production was also identified. The aim of this study was to identify all type-I PKS genes in the genomes of seven Elsino & euml; species with the goal of independently verifying the PKS containing clusters for both melanin and elsinochrome production. A total of six type-I PKS classes were identified, although there was variation between the species in the number and type of classes present. Genes similar to the E. fawcettii EfPKS1 and EfETB1 type-I PKS genes were associated with melanin and elsinochrome production respectively in all species. The complete melanin and elsinochrome PKS containing clusters were subsequently annotated in all the species with high levels of synteny across Elsino & euml; species. This study provides a genus-level overview of type-I PKS distribution in Elsino & euml; species, including an additional line of support for the annotation of the melanin and elsinochrome PKS containing clusters in these important plant pathogens.
BackgroundAcute Hepatopancreatic Necrosis Disease (AHPND) causes significant mortality in shrimp aquaculture. The infection is primarily instigated by Vibrio parahaemolyticus (Vp) strains carrying a plasmid encoding the binary toxin PirAB. Yet, comprehension of supplementary virulence factors associated with this relatively recent disease remains limited. Furthermore, the same holds for gastroenteritis in humans caused by other Vp genotypes. Additionally, given the prevalent use of antibiotics to combat bacterial infections, it becomes imperative to illuminate the presence of antimicrobial resistance genes within these bacteria. ResultsA subsampled number of 1,036 Vp genomes was screened for the presence of antimicrobial resistance genes, revealing an average prevalence of 5 +/- 2 (SD) genes. Additional phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility testing of three Vp strains (M0904, TW01, and PV1) sequenced in this study demonstrated resistance to ampicillin by all tested strains. Additionally, Vp M0904 showed multidrug resistance (against ampicillin, tetracycline, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole). With a focus on AHPND, a screening of all Vibrio spp. for the presence of pirA and/or pirB indicates an estimated prevalence of 0.6%, including four V. campbellii, four V. owensii, and a Vibrio sp. next to Vp. Their pirAB-encoding plasmids exhibited a highly conserved backbone, with variations primarily in the region of the Tn3 family transposase. Furthermore, an assessment of the subsampled Vp genomes for the presence of known virulence factors showed a correlation between the presence of the Type 3 Secretion System 2 and tdh, while the presence of the Type 6 Secretion System 1 was clade dependent. Furthermore, a genome-wide association study (GWAS) unveiled (new) genes associated with pirA, pirB, tdh, and trh genotypes. Notable associations with the pirAB genotype included outer membrane proteins, immunoglobulin-like domain containing proteins, and toxin-antitoxin systems. For the tdh + /trh + genotypes (containing tdh, trh, or both genes), associations were found with T3SS2 genes, urease-related genes and nickel-transport system genes, and genes involved in a 'minimal' type I-F CRISPR mechanism. ConclusionsThis study highlights the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance and virulence genes in Vp, identifying novel genetic markers associated with AHPND and tdh + /trh + genotypes. These findings contribute valuable insights into the genomic basis of these genotypes, with implications for shrimp aquaculture and food safety.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying alcohol metabolism and its regulation, including the effect of polymorphisms in alcohol-metabolizing enzymes, is crucial for research on Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders. The aim of this study was to identify specific single nucleotide polymorphisms in key alcohol-metabolizing enzymes in a cohort of 71 children, including children with fetal alcohol syndrome, children prenatally exposed to ethanol but without fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, and controls. We hypothesized that certain genetic variants related to alcohol metabolism may be fixed in these populations, giving them a particular alcohol metabolism profile. In addition, the difference in certain isoforms of these enzymes determines their affinity for alcohol, which also affects the metabolism of retinoic acid, which is key to the proper development of the central nervous system. Our results showed that children prenatally exposed to ethanol without fetal alcohol spectrum disorder traits had a higher frequency of the ADH1B*3 and ADH1C*1 alleles, which are associated with increased alcohol metabolism and therefore a protective factor against circulating alcohol in the fetus after maternal drinking, compared to FAS children who had an allele with a lower affinity for alcohol. This study also revealed the presence of an ADH4 variant in the FAS population that binds weakly to the teratogen, allowing increased circulation of the toxic agent and direct induction of developmental abnormalities in the fetus. However, both groups showed dysregulation in the expression of genes related to the retinoic acid pathway, such as retinoic acid receptor and retinoid X receptor, which are involved in the development, regeneration, and maintenance of the nervous system. These findings highlight the importance of understanding the interplay between alcohol metabolism, the retinoic acid pathway and genetic factors in the development of fetal alcohol syndrome.
Black flounder (Paralichthys orbignyanus, Pleuronectiformes) is a commercially significant marine fish with promising aquaculture potential in Argentina. Despite extensive studies on Black flounder aquaculture, its limited genetic information available hampers the crucial role genetics plays in the development of this activity. In this study, we first employed Illumina sequencing technology to sequence the entire genome of Black flounder. Utilizing two independent libraries-one from a female and another from a male-with 150 bp paired-end reads, a mean insert length of 350 bp, and over 35 X-fold coverage, we achieved assemblies resulting in a genome size of similar to 538 Mbp. Analysis of the assemblies revealed that more than 98% of the core genes were present, with more than 78% of them having more than 50% coverage. This indicates a somehow complete and accurate genome at the coding sequence level. This genome contains 25,231 protein-coding genes, 445 tRNAs, 3 rRNAs, and more than 1,500 non-coding RNAs of other types. Black flounder, along with pufferfishes, seahorses, pipefishes, and anabantid fish, displays a smaller genome compared to most other teleost groups. In vertebrates, the number of transposable elements (TEs) is often correlated with genome size. However, it remains unclear whether the sizes of introns and exons also play a role in determining genome size. Hence, to elucidate the potential factors contributing to this reduced genome size, we conducted a comparative genomic analysis between Black flounder and other teleost orders to determine if the small genomic size could be explained by repetitive elements or gene features, including the whole genome genes and introns sizes. We show that the smaller genome size of flounders can be attributed to several factors, including changes in the number of repetitive elements, and decreased gene size, particularly due to lower amount of very large and small introns. Thus, these components appear to be involved in the genome reduction in Black flounder. Despite these insights, the full implications and potential benefits of genome reduction in Black flounder for reproduction and aquaculture remain incompletely understood, necessitating further research.
BackgroundAntifungal drug resistance presents one of the major concerns for global public health, and hybridization allows the development of high fitness organisms that can better survive in restrictive conditions or in presence of antifungal agents. Hence, understanding how allelic variation can influence antifungal susceptibility in hybrid organisms is important for the development of targeted treatments. Here, we exploited recent advances in multigenerational breeding of hemiascomycete hybrids to study the impact of hybridisation on antifungal resistance and identify quantitative trait loci responsible for the phenotype.ResultsThe offspring of Saccharomyces cerevisiae x S. kudriavzevii hybrids were screened in the presence of six antifungal drugs and revealed a broad phenotypic diversity across the progeny. QTL analysis was carried out comparing alleles between pools of high and low fitness offspring, identifying hybrid-specific genetic regions involved in resistance to fluconazole, micafungin and flucytosine. We found both drug specific and pleiotropic regions, including 41 blocks containing genes not previously associated with resistance phenotypes. We identified linked genes that influence the same trait, namely a hybrid specific 'super' QTL, and validated, via reciprocal hemizygosity analysis, two causal genes, BCK2 and DNF1. The co-location of genes with similar phenotypic impact supports the notion of an adaption process that limits the segregation of advantageous alleles via recombination.ConclusionsThis study demonstrates the value of QTL studies to elucidate the hybrid-specific mechanisms of antifungal susceptibility. We also show that an inter-species hybrid model system in the Saccharomyces background, can help to decipher the trajectory of antifungal drug resistance in pathogenic hybrid lineages.
Background Identifying the DNA-binding specificities of transcription factors (TF) is central to understanding gene networks that regulate growth and development. Such knowledge is lacking in oomycetes, a microbial eukaryotic lineage within the stramenopile group. Oomycetes include many important plant and animal pathogens such as the potato and tomato blight agent Phytophthora infestans, which is a tractable model for studying life-stage differentiation within the group. Results Mining of the P. infestans genome identified 197 genes encoding proteins belonging to 22 TF families. Their chromosomal distribution was consistent with family expansions through unequal crossing-over, which were likely ancient since each family had similar sizes in most oomycetes. Most TFs exhibited dynamic changes in RNA levels through the P. infestans life cycle. The DNA-binding preferences of 123 proteins were assayed using protein-binding oligonucleotide microarrays, which succeeded with 73 proteins from 14 families. Binding sites predicted for representatives of the families were validated by electrophoretic mobility shift or chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Consistent with the substantial evolutionary distance of oomycetes from traditional model organisms, only a subset of the DNA-binding preferences resembled those of human or plant orthologs. Phylogenetic analyses of the TF families within P. infestans often discriminated clades with canonical and novel DNA targets. Paralogs with similar binding preferences frequently had distinct patterns of expression suggestive of functional divergence. TFs were predicted to either drive life stage-specific expression or serve as general activators based on the representation of their binding sites within total or developmentally-regulated promoters. This projection was confirmed for one TF using synthetic and mutated promoters fused to reporter genes in vivo. Conclusions We established a large dataset of binding specificities for P. infestans TFs, representing the first in the stramenopile group. This resource provides a basis for understanding transcriptional regulation by linking TFs with their targets, which should help delineate the molecular components of processes such as sporulation and host infection. Our work also yielded insight into TF evolution during the eukaryotic radiation, revealing both functional conservation as well as diversification across kingdoms.
Background The increasing burden of dengue virus on public health due to more explosive and frequent outbreaks highlights the need for improved surveillance and control. Genomic surveillance of dengue virus not only provides important insights into the emergence and spread of genetically diverse serotypes and genotypes, but it is also critical to monitor the effectiveness of newly implemented control strategies. Here, we present DengueSeq, an amplicon sequencing protocol, which enables whole-genome sequencing of all four dengue virus serotypes. Results We developed primer schemes for the four dengue virus serotypes, which can be combined into a pan-serotype approach. We validated both approaches using genetically diverse virus stocks and clinical specimens that contained a range of virus copies. High genome coverage (>95%) was achieved for all genotypes, except DENV2 (genotype VI) and DENV 4 (genotype IV) sylvatics, with similar performance of the serotype-specific and pan-serotype approaches. The limit of detection to reach 70% coverage was 10-100 RNA copies/mu L for all four serotypes, which is similar to other commonly used primer schemes. DengueSeq facilitates the sequencing of samples without known serotypes, allows the detection of multiple serotypes in the same sample, and can be used with a variety of library prep kits and sequencing instruments. Conclusions DengueSeq was systematically evaluated with virus stocks and clinical specimens spanning the genetic diversity within each of the four dengue virus serotypes. The primer schemes can be plugged into existing amplicon sequencing workflows to facilitate the global need for expanded dengue virus genomic surveillance.
BackgroundIn the face of contemporary climatic vulnerabilities and escalating global temperatures, the prevalence of maydis leaf blight (MLB) poses a potential threat to maize production. This study endeavours to discern marker-trait associations and elucidate the candidate genes that underlie resistance to MLB in maize by employing a diverse panel comprising 336 lines. The panel was screening for MLB across four environments, employing standard artificial inoculation techniques. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and haplotype analysis were conducted utilizing a total of 128,490 SNPs obtained from genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS).ResultsGWAS identified 26 highly significant SNPs associated with MLB resistance, among the markers examined. Seven of these SNPs, reported in novel chromosomal bins (9.06, 5.01, 9.01, 7.04, 4.06, 1.04, and 6.05) were associated with genes: bzip23, NAGS1, CDPK7, aspartic proteinase NEP-2, VQ4, and Wun1, which were characterized for their roles in diminishing fungal activity, fortifying defence mechanisms against necrotrophic pathogens, modulating phyto-hormone signalling, and orchestrating oxidative burst responses. Gene mining approach identified 22 potential candidate genes associated with SNPs due to their functional relevance to resistance against necrotrophic pathogens. Notably, bin 8.06, which hosts five SNPs, showed a connection to defense-regulating genes against MLB, indicating the potential formation of a functional gene cluster that triggers a cascade of reactions against MLB. In silico studies revealed gene expression levels exceeding ten fragments per kilobase million (FPKM) for most genes and demonstrated coexpression among all candidate genes in the coexpression network. Haplotype regression analysis revealed the association of 13 common significant haplotypes at Bonferroni <= 0.05. The phenotypic variance explained by these significant haplotypes ranged from low to moderate, suggesting a breeding strategy that combines multiple resistance alleles to enhance resistance to MLB. Additionally, one particular haplotype block (Hap_8.3) was found to consist of two SNPs (S8_152715134, S8_152460815) identified in GWAS with 9.45% variation explained (PVE).ConclusionThe identified SNPs/ haplotypes associated with the trait of interest contribute to the enrichment of allelic diversity and hold direct applicability in Genomics Assisted Breeding for enhancing MLB resistance in maize.
Background Paenibacillus polymyxa is a bacterial species of high interest, as suggested by the increased number of publications on its functions in the past years. Accordingly, the number of described strains and sequenced genomes is also on the rise. While functional diversity of P. polymyxa has been suggested before, the available genomic data is now sufficient for robust comparative genomics analyses. Results Using 157 genomes, we found significant disparities among strains currently affiliated to P. polymyxa. Multiple taxonomic groups were identified with conserved predicted functions putatively impacting their respective ecology. As strains of this species have been reported to exhibit considerable potential in agriculture, medicine, and bioremediation, it is preferable to clarify their taxonomic organization to facilitate reliable and durable approval as active ingredients. Conclusions Strains currently affiliated to P. polymyxa can be separated into two major species groups with differential potential in nitrogen fixation, plant interaction, secondary metabolism, and antimicrobial resistance, as inferred from genomic data.
BackgroundRNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) offers profound insights into the complex transcriptomes of diverse biological systems. However, standard differential expression analysis pipelines based on DESeq2 and edgeR encounter challenges when applied to the immediate early transcriptomes of Chlamydia spp., obligate intracellular bacteria. These challenges arise from their reliance on assumptions that do not hold in scenarios characterized by extensive transcriptomic activation and limited repression. ResultsStandard analyses using unique chlamydial RNA-Seq reads alone identify nearly 300 upregulated and about 300 downregulated genes, significantly deviating from actual RNA-Seq read trends. By incorporating both chlamydial and host reads or adjusting for total sequencing depth, the revised normalization methods each detected over 700 upregulated genes and 30 or fewer downregulated genes, closely aligned with observed RNA-Seq data. Further validation through qRT-PCR analysis confirmed the effectiveness of these adjusted approaches in capturing the true extent of transcriptomic activation during the immediate early phase of chlamydial infection. ConclusionsThis study highlights the limitations of standard RNA-Seq analysis tools in scenarios with extensive transcriptomic activation, such as in Chlamydia spp. during early infection. Our revised normalization methods, incorporating host reads or total sequencing depth, provide a more accurate representation of gene expression dynamics. These approaches may inform similar adjustments in other systems with unbalanced gene expression dynamics, enhancing the accuracy of transcriptomic analysis.
Background Environmental temperature is critical in regulating biological functions in fish. S. prenanti is a kind of cold-water fish, but of which we have little knowledge about the metabolic adaptation and physiological responses to long-term cold acclimation. Results In this study, we determined the physiological responses of S. prenanti serum after 30 days of exposure to 6degree celsius. Compared with the control group, the levels of TC, TG, and LDL-C in the serum were significantly (P < 0.05) increased, and the level of glucose was significantly (P < 0.05) decreased under cold acclimation. Cold acclimation had no effect on the gene expression of pro-inflammatory factors and anti-inflammatory factors of S. prenanti. Metabolomics analysis by LC-MS showed that a total of 60 differential expressed metabolites were identified after cold acclimation, which involved in biosynthesis of amino acids, biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, steroid degradation, purine metabolism, and citrate cycle pathways. Conclusion The results indicate that cold acclimation can alter serum metabolites and metabolic pathways to alter energy metabolism and provide insights for the physiological regulation of cold-water fish in response to cold acclimation.
Background Centromeres play a crucial and conserved role in cell division, although their composition and evolutionary history in green algae, the evolutionary ancestors of land plants, remains largely unknown. Results We constructed near telomere-to-telomere (T2T) assemblies for two Trebouxiophyceae species, Chlorella sorokiniana NS4-2 and Chlorella pyrenoidosa DBH, with chromosome numbers of 12 and 13, and genome sizes of 58.11 Mb and 53.41 Mb, respectively. We identified and validated their centromere sequences using CENH3 ChIP-seq and found that, similar to humans and higher plants, the centromeric CENH3 signals of green algae display a pattern of hypomethylation. Interestingly, the centromeres of both species largely comprised transposable elements, although they differed significantly in their composition. Species within the Chlorella genus display a more diverse centromere composition, with major constituents including members of the LTR/Copia, LINE/L1, and LINE/RTEX families. This is in contrast to green algae including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Coccomyxa subellipsoidea, and Chromochloris zofingiensis, in which centromere composition instead has a pronounced single-element composition. Moreover, we observed significant differences in the composition and structure of centromeres among chromosomes with strong collinearity within the Chlorella genus, suggesting that centromeric sequence evolves more rapidly than sequence in non-centromeric regions. Conclusions This study not only provides high-quality genome data for comparative genomics of green algae but gives insight into the composition and evolutionary history of centromeres in early plants, laying an important foundation for further research on their evolution.
BackgroundThe stalk traits stalk diameter, stalk length, rind penetrometer resistance and dry matter content are important indicators for measuring lodging resistance.ResultsIn this study, 377 inbred lines were used as the basic materials, and four stalk-related traits including stalk diameter, stalk length, rind penetrometer resistance and dry matter content of the third segment of maize, were investigated at the tasseling, grain filling, and maturity stages. 461,053 high-quality SNPs which were obtained by whole genome resequencing were used for genome-wide association study. As a result of mixed linear model analysis (P < 9.77 x 10(-6)), 29 significant SNPs related to traits were detected, accounting for 7.19% -15.03% of phenotypic variation, among which 4, 1, 4 and 20 SNPs were found related to rind penetrometer resistance, stalk diameter, stalk length, and dry matter content respectively. Most candidate genes are related to plant element structure, signal transduction mechanisms, inorganic ion transport and metabolism, nucleotide transport and metabolism, and transporter enzyme families. Comparing mixed linear model with generalized linear model, a total of 12 candidate genes were detected repeatedly, during which the candidate gene Zm00001d014449 were detected 5 times, with a phenotypic variation interpretation rate of 9.95% -10.84%. This gene is mainly expressed in cells with active cell division and tissue differentiation, and is involved in the formation of stalk vascular bundles and the synthesis of cell walls. Another candidate gene, Zm00001d005300, encodes the transcription factor MYB44, which regulates the dependence of salt stress signal phosphorylation, can effectively inhibit the accumulation of destructive reactive oxygen species, and has a certain resistance to non-biotic stress. In addition, this study also found that 10 unknown functional genes can be further Functional verification.ConclusionsThis study helps to deepen the understanding of the genetic basis of traits related to maize stalk lodging resistance, and provides theoretical guidance for future maize lodging resistance breeding.
Background The G alpha family plays a crucial role in the complex reproductive regulatory network of teleosts. However, the characterization and function of G alpha family members, especially G alpha q, remain poorly understood in teleosts. To analyze the characterization, expression, and function of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) G alpha q, we identified the G alpha family members in grass carp genome, and analyzed the expression, distribution, and signal transduction of G alpha q/gnaq. We also explored the role of G alpha q in the reproductive regulation of grass carp. Results Our results showed that the grass carp genome contains 27 G alpha genes with 46 isoforms, which are divided into four subfamilies: G alpha s, G alpha i/o, G alpha q/11, and G alpha 12/13. The expression level of Cignaq in the testis was the highest and significantly higher than in other tissues, followed by the hypothalamus and brain. The luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) was mainly localized to the nucleus in grass carp oocytes, with signals also present in follicular cells. In contrast, G alpha q signal was mainly found in the cytoplasm of oocytes, with no signal in follicular cells. In the testis, G alpha q and LHR were co-localized in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, the grass carp G alpha q recombinant protein significantly promoted Cipgr expression. Conclusions These results provided preliminary evidence for understanding the role of G alpha q in the reproductive regulation of teleosts.
BackgroundThe widely adopted bulk RNA-seq measures the gene expression average of cells, masking cell type heterogeneity, which confounds downstream analyses. Therefore, identifying the cellular composition and cell type-specific gene expression profiles (GEPs) facilitates the study of the underlying mechanisms of various biological processes. Although single-cell RNA-seq focuses on cell type heterogeneity in gene expression, it requires specialized and expensive resources and currently is not practical for a large number of samples or a routine clinical setting. Recently, computational deconvolution methodologies have been developed, while many of them only estimate cell type composition or cell type-specific GEPs by requiring the other as input. The development of more accurate deconvolution methods to infer cell type abundance and cell type-specific GEPs is still essential.ResultsWe propose a new deconvolution algorithm, DSSC, which infers cell type-specific gene expression and cell type proportions of heterogeneous samples simultaneously by leveraging gene-gene and sample-sample similarities in bulk expression and single-cell RNA-seq data. Through comparisons with the other existing methods, we demonstrate that DSSC is effective in inferring both cell type proportions and cell type-specific GEPs across simulated pseudo-bulk data (including intra-dataset and inter-dataset simulations) and experimental bulk data (including mixture data and real experimental data). DSSC shows robustness to the change of marker gene number and sample size and also has cost and time efficiencies.ConclusionsDSSC provides a practical and promising alternative to the experimental techniques to characterize cellular composition and heterogeneity in the gene expression of heterogeneous samples.
Background The escalating impacts of global warming intensify the detrimental effects of heat stress on crop growth and yield. Among the earliest and most vulnerable sites of damage is Photosystem II (PSII). Plants exposed to recurring high temperatures develop heat stress memory, a phenomenon that enables them to retain information from previous stress events to better cope with subsequent one. Understanding the components and regulatory networks associated with heat stress memory is crucial for the development of heat-resistant crops. Results Physiological assays revealed that heat priming (HP) enabled tall fescue to possess higher Photosystem II photochemical activity when subjected to trigger stress. To investigate the underlying mechanisms of heat stress memory, we performed comparative proteomic analyses on tall fescue leaves at S0 (control), R4 (primed), and S5 (triggering), using an integrated approach of Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling and Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry. A total of 3,851 proteins were detected, with quantitative information available for 3,835 proteins. Among these, we identified 1,423 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs), including 526 proteins that were classified as Heat Stress Memory Proteins (HSMPs). GO and KEGG enrichment analyses revealed that the HSMPs were primarily associated with the "autophagy" in R4 and with "PSII repair", "HSP binding", and "peptidase activity" in S5. Notably, we identified 7 chloroplast-localized HSMPs (HSP21, DJC77, EGY3, LHCA4, LQY1, PSBR and DEGP8, R4/S0 > 1.2, S5/S0 > 1.2), which were considered to be effectors linked to PSII heat stress memory, predominantly in cluster 4. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis indicated that the ubiquitin-proteasome system, with key nodes at UPL3, RAD23b, and UCH3, might play a role in the selective retention of memory effectors in the R4 stage. Furthermore, we conducted RT-qPCR validation on 12 genes, and the results showed that in comparison to the S5 stage, the R4 stage exhibited reduced consistency between transcript and protein levels, providing additional evidence for post-transcriptional regulation in R4. Conclusions These findings provide valuable insights into the establishment of heat stress memory under recurring high-temperature episodes and offer a conceptual framework for breeding thermotolerant crops with improved PSII functionality.
BackgroundThis study aimed to design and develop a 5K low-density liquid chip for Hainan cattle utilizing targeted capture sequencing technology. The chip incorporates a substantial number of functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci derived from public literature, including SNP loci significantly associated with immunity, heat stress, meat quality, reproduction, and other traits. Additionally, SNPs located in the coding regions of immune-related genes from the Bovine Genome Variation Database (BGVD) and Hainan cattle-specific SNP loci were included.ResultsA total of 5,293 SNPs were selected, resulting in 9,837 DNA probes with a coverage rate of 85.69%, thereby creating a Hainan cattle-specific 5K Genotyping by Target Sequencing (GBTS) liquid chip. Evaluation with 152 cattle samples demonstrated excellent clustering performance and a detection rate ranging from 96.60 to 99.07%, with 94.5% of SNP sites exhibiting polymorphism. The chip achieved 100% gender coverage and displayed a heterozygosity rate between 14.20% and 29.65%, with a repeatability rate of 99.65-99.85%. Analyses using Gene Ontology (GO) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) revealed the potential regulatory roles of exonic SNPs in immune response pathways.ConclusionThe development and validation of the 5K GBTS liquid chip for Hainan cattle represent a valuable tool for genome analysis and genetic diversity assessment. Furthermore, it facilitates breed identification, gender determination, and kinship analysis, providing a foundation for the efficient utilization and development of local cattle genetic resources.
Background Shewanella xiamenensis, widely distributed in natural environments, has long been considered as opportunistic pathogen. Recently, significant changes in the resistance spectrum have been observed in S. xiamenensis, due to acquired antibiotic resistance genes. Therefore, a pan-genome analysis was conducted to illuminate the genomic changes in S. xiamenensis. Results Phylogenetic analysis revealed three major clusters and three singletons, among which close relationship between several strains was discovered, regardless of their host and niches. The "open" genomes with diversity of accessory and strain-specific genomes took advantage towards diversity environments. The purifying selection pressure was the main force on genome evolution, especially in conservative genes. Only 53 gene families were under positive selection pressure. Phenotypic resistance analysis revealed 21 strains were classified as multi-drug resistance (MDR). Ten types of antibiotic resistance genes and two heavy metal resistance operons were discovered in S. xiamenensis. Mobile genetic elements and horizontal gene transfer increased genome diversity and were closely related to MDR strains. S. xiamenensis carried a variety of virulence genes and macromolecular secretion systems, indicating their important roles in pathogenicity and adaptability. Type IV secretion system was discovered in 15 genomes with various sequence structures, indicating it was originated from different donors through horizontal gene transfer. Conclusions This study provided with a detailed insight into the changes in the pan-genome of S. xiamenensis, highlighting its capability to acquire new mobile genetic elements and resistance genes for its adaptation to environment and pathogenicity to human and animals.
Background Carcass traits are essential economic traits in the commercial pig industry. However, the genetic mechanism of carcass traits is still unclear. In this study, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) based on the specific-locus amplified fragment sequencing (SLAF-seq) to study seven carcass traits on 223 four-way intercross pigs, including dressing percentage (DP), number of ribs (RIB), skin thinkness (ST), carcass straight length (CSL), carcass diagonal length (CDL), loin eye width (LEW), and loin eye thickness (LET). Results A total of 227,921 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were detected to perform GWAS. A total of 30 SNPs were identified for seven carcass traits using the mixed linear model (MLM) (p < 1.0 x 10(- 5)), of which 9 SNPs were located in previously reported quantitative trait loci (QTL) regions. The phenotypic variation explained (PVE) by the significant SNPs was from 2.43 to 16.32%. Furthermore, 11 candidate genes (LYPLAL1, EPC1, MATN2, ZFAT, ZBTB10, ZNF704, INHBA, SMYD3, PAK1, SPTBN2, and ACTN3) were found for carcass traits in pigs. Conclusions The GWAS results will improve our understanding of the genetic basis of carcass traits. We hypothesized that the candidate genes associated with these discovered SNPs would offer a biological basis for enhancing the carcass quality of pigs in swine breeding.
Background Body weight and size are important economic traits in chickens. While many growth-related quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and candidate genes have been identified, further research is needed to confirm and characterize these findings. In this study, we investigate genetic and genomic markers associated with chicken body weight and size. This study provides new insights into potential markers for genomic selection and breeding strategies to improve meat production in chickens.Methods We performed whole-genome resequencing of and Wenshang Barred (WB) chickens (n = 596) and three additional breeds with varying body sizes (Recessive White (RW), WB, and Luxi Mini (LM) chickens; (n = 50)). We then used selective sweeps of mutations coupled with genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify genomic markers associated with body weight and size.Results We identified over 9.4 million high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) among three chicken breeds/lines. Among these breeds, 287 protein-coding genes exhibited positive selection in the RW and WB populations, while 241 protein-coding genes showed positive selection in the LM and WB populations. Genomic heritability estimates were calculated for 26 body weight and size traits, including body weight, chest breadth, chest depth, thoracic horn, body oblique length, keel length, pelvic width, shank length, and shank circumference in the WB breed. The estimates ranged from 0.04 to 0.67. Our analysis also identified a total of 2,522 genome-wide significant SNPs, with 2,474 SNPs clustered around two genomic regions. The first region, located on chromosome 4 (7.41-7.64 Mb), was linked to body weight after ten weeks and body size traits. LCORL, LDB2, and PPARGC1A were identified as candidate genes in this region. The other region, located on chromosome 1 (170.46-171.53 Mb), was associated with body weight from four to eighteen weeks and body size traits. This region contained CAB39L and WDFY2 as candidate genes. Notably, LCORL, LDB2, and PPARGC1A showed highly selective signatures among the three breeds of chicken with varying body sizes.Conclusion Overall this study provides a comprehensive map of genomic variants associated with body weight and size in chickens. We propose two genomic regions, one on chromosome 1 and the other on chromosome 4, that could helpful for developing genome selection breeding strategies to enhance meat yield in chickens.
BackgroundIn epigenetic modification, histone modification and DNA methylation coordinate the regulation of spermatogonium. Not only can methylcytosine dioxygenase 1 (TET1) function as a DNA demethylase, converting 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, it can also form complexes with other proteins to regulate gene expression. H3K27me3, one of the common histone modifications, is involved in the regulation of stem cell maintenance and tumorigenesis by inhibiting gene transcription.Methodswe examined JMJD3 at both mRNA and protein levels and performed Chip-seq sequencing of H3K27me3 in TET1 overexpressing cells to search for target genes and signaling pathways of its action.ResultsThis study has found that JMJD3 plays a leading role in spermatogonia self-renewal and proliferation: at one extreme, the expression of the self-renewal gene GFRA1 and the proliferation-promoting gene PCNA was upregulated following the overexpression of JMJD3 in spermatogonia; at the other end of the spectrum, the expression of differentiation-promoting gene DAZL was down-regulated. Furthermore, the fact that TET1 and JMJD3 can form a protein complex to interact with H3K27me3 has also been fully proven. Then, through analyzing the sequencing results of CHIP-Seq, we found that TET1 targeted Pramel3 when it interacted with H3K27me3. Besides, TET1 overexpression not only reduced H3K27me3 deposition at Pramel3, but promoted its transcriptional activation as well, and the up-regulation of Pramel3 expression was verified in JMJD3-overexpressing spermatogonia.ConclusionIn summary, our study identified a novel link between TET1 and H3K27me3 and established a Tet1-JMJD3-H3K27me3-Pramel3 axis to regulate spermatogonia self-renewal and proliferation. Judging from the evidence offered above, we can safely conclude that this study provides new ideas for further research regarding the mechanism of spermatogenesis and spermatogenesis disorders on an apparent spectrum.
BackgroundLavandula angustifolia holds importance as an aromatic plant with extensive applications spanning the fragrance, perfume, cosmetics, aromatherapy, and spa sectors. Beyond its aesthetic and sensory applications, this plant offers medicinal benefits as a natural herbal remedy and finds use in household cleaning products. While extensive genomic data, inclusive of plastid and nuclear genomes, are available for this species, researchers have yet to characterize its mitochondrial genome. This gap in knowledge hampers deeper understanding of the genome organization and its evolutionary significance. ResultsThrough the course of this study, we successfully assembled and annotated the mitochondrial genome of L. angustifolia, marking a first in this domain. This assembled genome encompasses 61 genes, which comprise 34 protein-coding genes, 24 transfer RNA genes, and three ribosomal RNA genes. We identified a chloroplast sequence insertion into the mitogenome, which spans a length of 10,645 bp, accounting for 2.94% of the mitogenome size. Within these inserted sequences, there are seven intact tRNA genes (trnH-GUG, trnW-CCA, trnD-GUC, trnS-GGA, trnN-GUU, trnT-GGU, trnP-UGG) and four complete protein-coding genes (psbA, rps15, petL, petG) of chloroplast derivation. Additional discoveries include 88 microsatellites, 15 tandem repeats, 74 palindromic repeats, and 87 forward long repeats. An RNA editing analysis highlighted an elevated count of editing sites in the cytochrome c oxidase genes, notably ccmB with 34 editing sites, ccmFN with 32, and ccmC with 29. All protein-coding genes showed evidence of cytidine-to-uracil conversion. A phylogenetic analysis, utilizing common protein-coding genes from 23 Lamiales species, yielded a tree with consistent topology, supported by high confidence values. ConclusionsAnalysis of the current mitogenome resource revealed its typical circular genome structure. Notably, sequences originally from the chloroplast genome were found within the mitogenome, pointing to the occurrence of horizontal gene transfer between organelles. This assembled mitogenome stands as a valuable resource for subsequent studies on mitogenome structures, their evolution, and molecular biology.
Background and objectivesComprehensive analysis of multi-omics data is crucial for accurately formulating effective treatment plans for complex diseases. Supervised ensemble methods have gained popularity in recent years for multi-omics data analysis. However, existing research based on supervised learning algorithms often fails to fully harness the information from unlabeled nodes and overlooks the latent features within and among different omics, as well as the various associations among features. Here, we present a novel multi-omics integrative method MOSEGCN, based on the Transformer multi-head self-attention mechanism and Graph Convolutional Networks(GCN), with the aim of enhancing the accuracy of complex disease classification. MOSEGCN first employs the Transformer multi-head self-attention mechanism and Similarity Network Fusion (SNF) to separately learn the inherent correlations of latent features within and among different omics, constructing a comprehensive view of diseases. Subsequently, it feeds the learned crucial information into a self-ensembling Graph Convolutional Network (SEGCN) built upon semi-supervised learning methods for training and testing, facilitating a better analysis and utilization of information from multi-omics data to achieve precise classification of disease subtypes.ResultsThe experimental results show that MOSEGCN outperforms several state-of-the-art multi-omics integrative analysis approaches on three types of omics data: mRNA expression data, microRNA expression data, and DNA methylation data, with accuracy rates of 83.0% for Alzheimer's disease and 86.7% for breast cancer subtyping. Furthermore, MOSEGCN exhibits strong generalizability on the GBM dataset, enabling the identification of important biomarkers for related diseases.ConclusionMOSEGCN explores the significant relationship information among different omics and within each omics' latent features, effectively leveraging labeled and unlabeled information to further enhance the accuracy of complex disease classification. It also provides a promising approach for identifying reliable biomarkers, paving the way for personalized medicine.
Background Untargeted metabolomics and proteomics were employed to investigate the intracellular response of yak rumen epithelial cells (YRECs) to conditions mimicking subacute rumen acidosis (SARA) etiology, including exposure to short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), low pH5.5 (Acid), and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure for 24 h. Results These treatments significantly altered the cellular morphology of YRECs. Metabolomic analysis identified significant perturbations with SCFA, Acid and LPS treatment affecting 259, 245 and 196 metabolites (VIP > 1, P < 0.05, and fold change (FC) >= 1.5 or FC <= 0.667). Proteomic analysis revealed that treatment with SCFA, Acid, and LPS resulted in differential expression of 1251, 1396, and 242 proteins, respectively (FC >= 1.2 or <= 0.83, P < 0.05, FDR < 1%). Treatment with SCFA induced elevated levels of metabolites involved in purine metabolism, glutathione metabolism, and arginine biosynthesis, and dysregulated proteins associated with actin cytoskeleton organization and ribosome pathways. Furthermore, SCFA reduced the number, morphology, and functionality of mitochondria, leading to oxidative damage and inhibition of cell survival. Gene expression analysis revealed a decrease the genes expression of the cytoskeleton and cell cycle, while the genes expression associated with inflammation and autophagy increased (P < 0.05). Acid exposure altered metabolites related to purine metabolism, and affected proteins associated with complement and coagulation cascades and RNA degradation. Acid also leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, alterations in mitochondrial integrity, and reduced ATP generation. It also causes actin filaments to change from filamentous to punctate, affecting cellular cytoskeletal function, and increases inflammation-related molecules, indicating the promotion of inflammatory responses and cellular damage (P < 0.05). LPS treatment induced differential expression of proteins involved in the TNF signaling pathway and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, accompanied by alterations in metabolites associated with arachidonic acid metabolism and MAPK signaling (P < 0.05). The inflammatory response and activation of signaling pathways induced by LPS treatment were also confirmed through protein interaction network analysis. The integrated analysis reveals co-enrichment of proteins and metabolites in cellular signaling and metabolic pathways. Conclusions In summary, this study contributes to a comprehensive understanding of the detrimental effects of SARA-associated factors on YRECs, elucidating their molecular mechanisms and providing potential therapeutic targets for mitigating SARA.
BackgroundPueraria is a widely cultivated medicinal and edible homologous plant in Asia, and its tuberous roots are commonly used in the food, nutraceutical, and pharmaceutical industries. "Gange No. 5" is a local variety of Pueraria montana var. thomsonii (Bentham) M.R. Almeida (PMT) in Jiangxi Province, China. After optimizing its cultivation technique, we shortened the cultivation cycle of this variety from two years to one year, suggesting that the regulatory mechanism of the endogenous hormone system during tuberous root expansion may have changed significantly. In this study, we focused on the molecular mechanisms of endogenous hormones in promoting tuberous root expansion during one-year cultivation of "Gange No. 5".ResultsThe mid-late expansion period (S4) is critical for the rapid swelling of "Gange No. 5" tuberous roots during annual cultivation. At S4, the number of cells increased dramatically and their volume enlarged rapidly in the tuberous roots, the fresh weight of a single root quickly increased, and the contents of multiple nutrients (total protein, total phenol, isoflavones) and medicinal components (puerarin, puerarin apigenin, and soy sapogenin) were at their peak values. We compared the transcriptomes and metabolomes of S1 (the pre-expansion period), S4, and S6 (the final expansion period), and screened 42 differentially accumulated hormone metabolites and 1,402 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with hormone biosynthesis, metabolism, and signaling. Most Auxin, cytokinins (CKs), jasmonic acids (JAs), salicylic acid (SA), melatonin (MLT), and ethylene (ETH), reached their maximum levels at S1 and then gradually decreased; however, abscisic acid (ABA) appeared in S6, indicating that most of the endogenous hormones may play a key role in regulating the initiation of tuberous root expansion, while ABA mainly promotes tuberous root maturation. Notably, multiple key genes of the 'Tryptophan metabolism' pathway (ko00380) were significantly differentially expressed, and COBRA1, COBRA2, YUCCA10, IAA13, IAA16, IAA20, IAA27, VAN3, ACAA2, and ARF were also identified to be significantly correlated with the expansion of "Gange No. 5" tuberous roots.ConclusionsOur study has revealed how endogenous hormone regulation affects the expansion of "Gange No. 5" tuberous roots. These findings offer a theoretical foundation for improving the yield of PMT tuberous roots.
Background Abscisic acid (ABA) plays a crucial role in seed dormancy, germination, and growth, as well as in regulating plant responses to environmental stresses during plant growth and development. However, detailed information about the PYL-PP2C-SnRK2s family, a central component of the ABA signaling pathway, is not known in pitaya. Results In this study, we identified 19 pyrabactin resistance-likes (PYLs), 70 type 2 C protein phosphatases (PP2Cs), and 14 SNF1-related protein kinase 2s (SnRK2s) from pitaya. In pitaya, tandem duplication was the primary mechanism for amplifying the PYL-PP2C-SnRK2s family. Co-linearity analysis revealed more homologous PYL-PP2C-SnRK2s gene pairs located in collinear blocks between pitaya and Beta vulgaris L. than that between pitaya and Arabidopsis. Transcriptome analysis showed that the PYL-PP2C-SnRK2s gene family plays a role in pitaya's response to infection by N. dimidiatum. By spraying ABA on pitaya and subsequently inoculating it with N. dimidiatum, we conducted qRT-PCR experiments to observe the response of the PYL-PP2C-SnRK2s gene family and disease resistance-related genes to ABA. These treatments significantly enhanced pitaya's resistance to pitaya canker. Further protein interaction network analysis helped us identify five key PYLs genes that were upregulated during the interaction between pitaya and N. dimidiatum, and their expression patterns were verified by qRT-PCR. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that the PYL (Hp1879) gene is primarily distributed in the nucleus. Conclusion This study enhances our understanding of the response of PYL-PP2C-SnRK2s to ABA and also offers a new perspective on pitaya disease resistance.
Background Due to its enormous biomass, Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) plays a crucial role in the Antarctic Ocean ecosystem. In recent years, Antarctic krill has found extensive application in aquaculture, emerging as a sustainable source of aquafeed with ideal nutritional profiles. However, a comprehensive study focused on the detailed effects of dietary Antarctic krill on aquaculture animals, especially farmed marine fishes, is yet to be demonstrated. Results In this study, a comparative experiment was performed using juvenile P. leopardus, fed with diets supplemented with Antarctic krill (the krill group) or without Antarctic krill (the control group). Histological observation revealed that dietary Antarctic krill could reduce lipid accumulation in the liver while the intestine exhibited no obvious changes. Enzyme activity measurements demonstrated that dietary Antarctic krill had an inhibitory effect on oxidative stress in both the intestine and the liver. By comparative transcriptome analysis, a total of 1,597 and 1,161 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the intestine and liver, respectively. Functional analysis of the DEGs showed multiple enriched terms significantly related to cholesterol metabolism, antioxidants, and immunity. Furthermore, the expression profiles of representative DEGs, such as dhcr7, apoa4, sc5d, and scarf1, were validated by qRT-PCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Finally, a comparative transcriptome analysis was performed to demonstrate the biased effects of dietary Antarctic krill and astaxanthin on the liver of P. leopardus. Conclusions Our study demonstrated that dietary Antarctic krill could reduce lipid accumulation in the liver of P. leopardus, enhance antioxidant capacities in both the intestine and liver, and exhibit molecular-level improvements in lipid metabolism, immunity, and antioxidants. It will contribute to understanding the protective effects of Antarctic krill in P. leopardus and provide insights into aquaculture nutritional strategies.
Background Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae (Psa) is an important bacterial plant pathogen that causes severe damage to the kiwifruit industry worldwide. Three Psa strains were recently obtained from different kiwifruit orchards in Anhui Province, China. The present study mainly focused on the variations in virulence and genome characteristics of these strains based on the pathogenicity assays and comparative genomic analyses. Results Three strains were identified as biovar 3 (Psa3), along with strain QSY6 showing higher virulence than JZY2 and YXH1 in pathogenicity assays. The whole genome assembly revealed that each of the three strains had a circular chromosome and a complete plasmid. The chromosome sizes ranged from 6.5 to 6.6 Mb with a GC content of approximately 58.39 to 58.46%, and a predicted number of protein-coding sequences ranging from 5,884 to 6,019. The three strains clustered tightly with 8 Psa3 reference strains in terms of average nucleotide identity (ANI), whole-genome-based phylogenetic analysis, and pangenome analysis, while they were evolutionarily distinct from other biovars (Psa1 and Psa5). Variations were observed in the repertoire of effectors of the type III secretion system among all 15 strains. Moreover, synteny analysis of the three sequenced strains revealed eight genomic regions containing 308 genes exclusively present in the highly virulent strain QSY6. Further investigation of these genes showed that 16 virulence-related genes highlight several key factors, such as effector delivery systems (type III secretion systems) and adherence (type IV pilus), which might be crucial for the virulence of QSY6. Conclusion Three Psa strains were identified and showed variant virulence in kiwifruit plant. Complete genome sequences and comparative genomic analyses further provided a theoretical basis for the potential pathogenic factors responsible for kiwifruit bacterial canker.
Background Sika deer (Cervus nippon) holds significance among cervids, with three genomes recently published. However, these genomes still contain hundreds of gaps and display significant discrepancies in continuity and accuracy. This poses challenges to functional genomics research and the selection of an appropriate reference genome. Thus, obtaining a high-quality reference genome is imperative to delve into functional genomics effectively. Findings Here we report a high-quality consensus genome of male sika deer. All 34 chromosomes are assembled into single-contig pseudomolecules without any gaps, which is the most complete assembly. The genome size is 2.7G with 23,284 protein-coding genes. Comparative genomics analysis found that the genomes of sika deer and red deer are highly conserved, an approximately 2.4G collinear regions with up to 99% sequence similarity. Meanwhile, we observed the fusion of red deer's Chr23 and Chr4 during evolution, forming sika deer's Chr1. Additionally, we identified 607 transcription factors (TFs) that are involved in the regulation of antler development, including RUNX2, SOX6, SOX8, SOX9, PAX8, SIX2, SIX4, SIX6, SPI1, NFAC1, KLHL8, ZN710, JDP2, and TWST2, based on this consensus reference genome. Conclusions Our results indicated that we acquired a high-quality consensus reference genome. That provided valuable resources for understanding functional genomics. In addition, discovered the genetic basis of sika-red hybrid fertility and identified 607 significant TFs that impact antler development.
Background Amino acids are the basic components of protein and an important index to evaluate meat quality. With the rapid development of genomics, candidate regions and genes affecting amino acid content in livestock and poultry have been gradually revealed. Hence, genome-wide association study (GWAS) can be used to screen candidate loci associated with amino acid content in duck meat. Result In the current study, the content of 16 amino acids was detected in 358 duck breast muscles. The proportion of Glu to the total amino acid content was relatively high, and the proportion was 0.14. However, the proportion of Met content was relatively low, at just 0.03. By comparative analysis, significant differences were found between males and females in 3 amino acids, including Ser, Met, and Phe. In addition, 12 SNPs were significantly correlated with Pro content by GWAS analysis, and these SNPs were annotated by 7 protein-coding genes; 8 significant SNPs were associated with Tyr content, and these SNPs were annotated by 6 protein-coding genes. At the same time, linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis was performed on these regions with significant signals. The results showed that three SNPs in the 55-56 Mbp region of chromosome 3 were highly correlated with the leader SNP (chr3:55526954) that affected Pro content (r(2) > 0.6). Similarly, LD analysis showed that there were three SNPs in the 21.2-21.6 Mbp region of chromosome 13, which were highly correlated with leader SNP (chr13:21421661) (r(2) > 0.6). Moreover, Through functional enrichment analysis of all candidate genes. The results of GO enrichment analysis showed that several significant GO items were associated with amino acid transport function, including amino acid transmembrane transport and glutamine transport. The results further indicate that these candidate genes are closely associated with amino acid transport. Among them, key candidate genes include SLC38A1. For KEGG enrichment analysis, CACNA2D3 and CACNA1D genes were covered by significant pathways. Conclusion In this study, GWAS analysis found a total of 28 significant SNPs affecting amino acid content. Through gene annotation, a total of 20 candidate genes were screened. In addition, Through LD analysis and enrichment analysis, we considered that SERAC1, CACNA2D3 and SLC38A1 genes are important candidate genes affecting amino acid content in duck breast muscle.
BackgroundInner Mongolia cashmere goat (IMCG), renowned for its superior cashmere quality, is a Chinese indigenous goat breed that has been developed through natural and artificial selection over a long period. However, recently, the genetic resources of IMCGs have been significantly threatened by the introduction of cosmopolitan goat breeds and the absence of adequate breed protection systems.ResultsIn order to assess the conservation effectiveness of IMCGs and efficiently preserve and utilize the purebred germplasm resources, this study analyzed the genetic diversity, kinship, family structure, and inbreeding of IMCGs utilizing resequencing data from 225 randomly selected individuals analyzed using the Plink (v.1.90), GCTA (v.1.94.1), and R (v.4.2.1) software. A total of 12,700,178 high-quality SNPs were selected through quality control from 34,248,064 SNP sites obtained from 225 individuals. The average minor allele frequency (MAF), polymorphic information content (PIC), and Shannon information index (SHI) were 0.253, 0.284, and 0.530, respectively. The average observed heterozygosity (Ho) and the average expected heterozygosity (He) were 0.355 and 0.351, respectively. The analysis of the identity by state distance matrix and genomic relationship matrix has shown that most individuals' genetic distance and genetic relationship are far away, and the inbreeding coefficient is low. The family structure analysis identified 10 families among the 23 rams. A total of 14,109 runs of homozygosity (ROH) were identified in the 225 individuals, with an average ROH length of 1014.547 kb. The average inbreeding coefficient, calculated from ROH, was 0.026 for the overall population and 0.027 specifically among the 23 rams, indicating a low level of inbreeding within the conserved population.ConclusionsThe IMCGs exhibited moderate polymorphism and a low level of kinship with inbreeding occurring among a limited number of individuals. Simultaneously, it is necessary to prevent the loss of bloodline to guarantee the perpetuation of the IMCGs' germplasm resources.
BackgroundAlcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs) are the crucial enzymes that can convert ethanol into acetaldehyde. In tobacco, members of ADH gene family are involved in various stresses tolerance reactions, lipid metabolism and pathways related to plant development. It will be of great application significance to analyze the ADH gene family and expression profile under various stresses in tobacco.ResultsA total of 53 ADH genes were identified in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) genome and were grouped into 6 subfamilies based on phylogenetic analysis. Gene structure (exon/intron) and protein motifs were highly conserved among the NtADH genes, especially the members within the same subfamily. A total of 5 gene pairs of tandem duplication, and 3 gene pairs of segmental duplication were identified based on the analysis of gene duplication events. Cis-regulatory elements of the NtADH promoters participated in cell development, plant hormones, environmental stress, and light responsiveness. The analysis of expression profile showed that NtADH genes were widely expressed in topping stress and leaf senescence. However, the expression patterns of different members appeared to be diverse. The qRT-PCR analysis of 13 NtADH genes displayed their differential expression pattern in response to the bacterial pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum L. infection. Metabolomics analysis revealed that NtADH genes were primarily associated with carbohydrate metabolism, and moreover, four NtADH genes (NtADH20/24/48/51) were notably involved in the pathway of alpha-linolenic acid metabolism which related to the up-regulation of 9-hydroxy-12-oxo-10(E), 15(Z)-octadecadienoic acid and 9-hydroxy-12-oxo-15(Z)-octadecenoic acid.ConclusionThe genome-wide identification, evolutionary analysis, expression profiling, and exploration of related metabolites and metabolic pathways associated with NtADH genes have yielded valuable insights into the roles of these genes in response to various stresses. Our results could provide a basis for functional analysis of NtADH gene family under stressful conditions.
Backgrounds The single-pass long reads generated by third-generation sequencing technology exhibit a higher error rate. However, the circular consensus sequencing (CCS) produces shorter reads. Thus, it is effective to manage the error rate of long reads algorithmically with the help of the homologous high-precision and low-cost short reads from the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology.Methods In this work, a hybrid error correction method (NmTHC) based on a generative neural machine translation model is proposed to automatically capture discrepancies within the aligned regions of long reads and short reads, as well as the contextual relationships within the long reads themselves for error correction. Akin to natural language sequences, the long read can be regarded as a special "genetic language" and be processed with the idea of generative neural networks. The algorithm builds a sequence-to-sequence(seq2seq) framework with Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) as the core layer. The before and post-corrected long reads are regarded as the sentences in the source and target language of translation, and the alignment information of long reads with short reads is used to create the special corpus for training. The well-trained model can be used to predict the corrected long read.Results NmTHC outperforms the latest mainstream hybrid error correction methods on real-world datasets from two mainstream platforms, including PacBio and Nanopore. Our experimental evaluation results demonstrate that NmTHC can align more bases with the reference genome without any segmenting in the six benchmark datasets, proving that it enhances alignment identity without sacrificing any length advantages of long reads.Conclusion Consequently, NmTHC reasonably adopts the generative Neural Machine Translation (NMT) model to transform hybrid error correction tasks into machine translation problems and provides a novel perspective for solving long-read error correction problems with the ideas of Natural Language Processing (NLP). More remarkably, the proposed methodology is sequencing-technology-independent and can produce more precise reads.
Plant growth and development can be significantly impacted by drought stress. Plants will adjust the synthesis and accumulation of secondary metabolites to improve survival in times of water constraint. Simultaneously, drought stress can lead to modifications in the DNA methylation status of plants, and these modifications can directly impact gene expression and product synthesis by changing the DNA methylation status of functional genes involved in secondary metabolite synthesis. However, further research is needed to fully understand the extent to which DNA methylation modifies the content of secondary metabolites to mediate plants' responses to drought stress, as well as the underlying mechanisms involved. Our study found that in Eleutherococcus senticosus (E. senticosus), moderate water deprivation significantly decreased DNA methylation levels throughout the genome and at the promoters of EsFPS, EsSS, and EsSE. Transcription factors like EsMYB-r1, previously inhibited by DNA methylation, can re-bind to the EsFPS promotor region following DNA demethylation. This process promotes gene expression and, ultimately, saponin synthesis and accumulation. The increased saponin levels in E. senticosus acted as antioxidants, enhancing the plant's adaptability to drought stress.
BackgroundThyroid hormone (T3) has an inhibitory effect on tissue/organ regeneration. It is still elusive how T3 regulates this process. It is well established that the developmental effects of T3 are primarily mediated through transcriptional regulation by thyroid hormone receptors (TRs). Here we have taken advantage of mutant tadpoles lacking both TR alpha and TR beta (TRDKO), the only receptor genes in vertebrates, for RNA-seq analyses to investigate the transcriptome changes underlying the initiation of tail regeneration, i.e., wound healing and blastema formation, because this crucial initial step determines the extent of the functional regeneration in the later phase of tissue regrowth.ResultsWe discovered that GO (gene ontology) terms related to inflammatory response, metabolic process, cell apoptosis, and epithelial cell migration were highly enriched among commonly regulated genes during wound healing at either stage 56 or 61 or with either wild type (WT) or TRDKO tadpoles, consistent with the morphological changes associated with wound healing occurring in both regenerative (WT stage 56, TRDKO stage 56, TRDKO stage 61) and nonregenerative (WT stage 61) animals. Interestingly, ECM-receptor interaction and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, which are essential for blastema formation and regeneration, were significantly enriched among regulated genes in the 3 regenerative groups but not the non-regenerative group at the blastema formation period. In addition, the regulated genes specific to the nonregenerative group were highly enriched with genes involved in cellular senescence. Finally, T3 treatment at stage 56, while not inducing any measurable tail resorption, inhibited tail regeneration in the wild type but not TRDKO tadpoles.ConclusionsOur study suggests that TR-mediated, T3-induced gene regulation changed the permissive environment during the initial period of regeneration and affected the subsequent patterning/outgrowth period of the regeneration process. Specifically, T3 signaling via TRs inhibits the expression of ECM-related genes while promoting the expression of inflammation-related genes during the blastema formation period. Interestingly, our findings indicate that amputation-induced changes in DNA replication-related pathways can occur during this nonregenerative period. Further studies, particularly on the regenerative microenvironment that may depend on ECM-receptor interaction and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, should provide important insights on the regulation of regenerative capacity during vertebrate development.
BackgroundDecellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) is an intriguing natural biomaterial that has garnered significant attention due to its remarkable biological properties. In our study, we employed a cell-matrixed nerve graft for the repair of sciatic nerve defects in rats. The efficacy of this approach was assessed, and concurrently, the underlying molecular regulatory mechanisms were explored to elucidate how such grafts facilitate nerve regeneration. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) regulate mRNA expression via multiple mechanisms, including post-transcriptional regulation, transcription factor effects, and competitive binding with miRNAs. These interactions between lncRNAs and mRNAs facilitate precise control of gene expression, allowing organisms to adapt to varying biological environments and physiological states. By investigating the expression profiles and interaction dynamics of mRNAs and lncRNAs, we can enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms through which cell-matrixed nerve grafts influence neural repair. Such studies are pivotal in uncovering the intricate networks of gene regulation that underpin this process.ResultsWeighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) utilizes clustering algorithms, such as hierarchical clustering, to aggregate genes with similar expression profiles into modules. These modules, which potentially correspond to distinct biological functions or processes, can subsequently be analyzed for their association with external sample traits. By correlating gene modules with specific conditions, such as disease states or responses to treatments, WGCNA enables a deeper understanding of the genetic architecture underlying various phenotypic traits and their functional implications. We identified seven mRNA modules and five lncRNA modules that exhibited associations with treatment or time-related events by WGCNA. We found the blue (mRNAs) module which displayed a remarkable enrichment in "axonal guidance" and "metabolic pathways", exhibited strong co-expression with multiple lncRNA modules, including blue (related to "GnRH secretion" and "pyrimidine metabolism"), green (related to "arginine and proline metabolism"), black (related to "nitrogen metabolism"), grey60 (related to "PPAR signaling pathway"), and greenyellow (related to "steroid hormone biosynthesis"). All of the top 50 mRNAs and lncRNAs exhibiting the strongest correlation were derived from the blue module. Validation of key molecules were performed using immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR.ConclusionRevealing the principles and molecular regulatory mechanisms of the interaction between materials and biological entities, such as cells and tissues, is a direction for the development of biomimetic tissue engineering technologies and clinically effective products.
Background Madhuca longifolia, the energy-producing and medicinal tropical tree originally from southern India, faces difficulties in adapting to the low temperatures of late autumn and early winter in subtropical southern China, impacting its usability. Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms controlling the ability of this species to adapt to environmental challenges is essential for optimising horticulture efforts. Accordingly, this study aimed to elucidate the molecular responses of M. longifolia to low-temperature stress through genomic and transcriptomic analyses to inform strategies for its effective cultivation and utilisation in colder climates. Results Herein, the high-quality reference genome and genomic assembly for M. longifolia are presented for the first time. Using Illumina sequencing, Hi-C technology, and PacBio HiFi sequencing, we assembled a chromosome-level genome approximately 737.92 Mb in size, investigated its genomic features, and conducted an evolutionary analysis of the genus Madhuca. Additionally, using transcriptome sequencing, we identified 17,941 differentially expressed genes related to low-temperature response. Through bioinformatics analysis of the WRKY gene family, 15 genes crucial for M. longifolia low-temperature resistance were identified. Conclusions This research not only lays the groundwork for the successful ecological adaptation and cultivation of M. longifolia in China's southern subtropical regions but also offers valuable insights for the genetic enhancement of cold tolerance in tropical species, contributing to their sustainable horticulture and broader industrial, medicinal, and agricultural use.
Background Previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have established association between genetic variants and pulmonary function across various ethnics, whereas such associations are scarcely reported in Chinese adults. Therefore, we conducted an GWAS to explore relationships between genetic variants and pulmonary function among middle-aged Chinese dizygotic twins and further validated the top variants using data from the UK Biobank (UKB). Methods In the discovery phase, 139 dizygotic twin pairs were drawn from the Qingdao Twin Registry. Pulmonary function was assessed using three parameters: forced expiratory volume the first second (FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC), and FEV1/FVC ratio. GWAS was performed using GEMMA, Gene-based analysis was conducted by VEGAS2. And pathway enrichment analysis was performed using PASCAL. In the validation phase, Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with suggestive significance were examined through linear regression analysis of the additive effect model among 1573 Chinese ethnic participants from UKB. Results The median age of twin pairs in the study was 49 years. 3 SNPs (rs80345886, rs117883876, and 75139439) related to FEV1 achieved genome-wide significance. Moreover, 222, 150, and 73 SNPs surpassed suggestive evidence level (p < 1 x 10(- 5)) for FEV1, FVC, and FEV1/FVC, respectively. Among them, 16 SNPs located in TBC1D16 for FEV1, 25 SNPs located in GPR126 for FVC, and 2 SNPs located in CCDC110 for FEV1/FVC, the three genes were also revealed by gene-based analysis. Moreover, 12 novel SNPs related to pulmonary function were validated to reach the nominal significance level (p < 0.05) in the UKB, with some located in the TBC1D16, TAFA5, and MTHFD1L genes. Conclusion Our GWAS results on Chinese dizygotic twins provide new references for the genetic regulation on pulmonary function. Twelve novel susceptibility loci are considered as possible crucial to pulmonary function.
BackgroundElucidating the dynamics of gene expression across developmental stages, including the genomic characteristics of brain expression during infancy, is pivotal in deciphering human psychiatric and neurological disorders and providing insights into developmental disorders.ResultsLeveraging comprehensive human GWAS associations with temporal and spatial brain expression data, we discovered a distinctive co-expression cluster comprising 897 genes highly expressed specifically during infancy, enriched in functions related to the neuronal system. This gene cluster notably harbors the highest ratio of genes linked to psychiatric and neurological disorders. Through computational analysis, MYT1L emerged as a potential central transcription factor governing these genes. Remarkably, the infancy-specific expressed genes, including SYT1, exhibit prominent colocalization within human accelerated regions. Additionally, chromatin state analysis unveiled prevalent epigenetic markers associated with enhancer-specific modifications. In addition, this cluster of genes has demonstrated to be specifically highly expressed in cell-types including excitatory neurons, medial ganglionic eminence and caudal ganglionic eminence.ConclusionsThis study comprehensively characterizes the genomics and epigenomics of genes specifically expressed during infancy, identifying crucial hub genes and transcription factors. These findings offer valuable insights into early detection strategies and interventions for psychiatric and neurological disorders.
BackgroundSequencing-based genetic testing is widely used in biomedical research, including pathogenic microorganism detection with metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS). The application of sequencing results to clinical diagnosis and treatment relies on various interpretation knowledge bases. Currently, the existing knowledge bases are primarily built through manual knowledge extraction. This method requires professionals to read extensive literature and extract relevant knowledge from it, which is time-consuming and costly. Furthermore, manual extraction unavoidably introduces subjective biases. In this study, we aimed to automatically extract knowledge for interpreting mNGS results.MethodWe propose a novel approach to automatically extract pathogenic microorganism knowledge based on the question-answer (QA) model. First, we construct a MicrobeDB dataset since there is no available pathogenic microorganism QA dataset for training the model. The created dataset contains 3,161 samples from 618 published papers covering 224 pathogenic microorganisms. Then, we fine-tune the selected baseline model based on MicrobeDB. Finally, we utilize ChatGPT to enhance the diversity of training data, and employ data expansion to increase training data volume.ResultsOur method achieves an Exact Match (EM) and F1 score of 88.39% and 93.18%, respectively, on the MicrobeDB test set. We also conduct ablation studies on the proposed data augmentation method. In addition, we perform comparative experiments with the ChatPDF tool based on the ChatGPT API to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.ConclusionsOur method is effective and valuable for extracting pathogenic microorganism knowledge.
BackgroundImmunogenic cell death (ICD) has been identified as regulated cell death, which is sufficient to activate the adaptive immune response. This study aimed to research ICD-related genes and create a gene model to predict pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PAAD) patients' prognosis.MethodsThe RNA sequencing and clinical data were downloaded from the TGCA and GEO databases. The PAAD samples were classified into two subtypes based on the expression levels of ICD-related genes using consensus clustering. Based on the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), a prognostic scoring model was constructed using LASSO regression and Cox regression, and the scoring model was used to predict the prognosis of PAAD patients. Moreover, colony formation assay was performed to confirm the prognostic value of those genes.ResultsWe identified two ICD cluster by consensus clustering, and found that the the ICD-high group was closely associated with immune-hot phenotype, favorable clinical outcomes. We established an ICD-related prognostic model which can predict the prognosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Moreover, depletion of NT5E, ATG5, FOXP3, and IFNG inhibited the colony formation ability of pancreatic cancer cell.ConclusionWe identified a novel classification for PAAD based on the expression of ICD-related genes, which may provide a potential strategy for therapeutics against PAAD.
Background There is no consensus as to the origin of the domestic yak (Bos grunniens). Previous studies on yak mitochondria mainly focused on mitochondrial displacement loop (D-loop), a region with low phylogenetic resolution. Here, we analyzed the entire mitochondrial genomes of 509 yaks to obtain greater phylogenetic resolution and a comprehensive picture of geographical diversity. Results A total of 278 haplotypes were defined in 509 yaks from 21 yak breeds. Among them, 28 haplotypes were shared by different varieties, and 250 haplotypes were unique to specific varieties. The overall haplotype diversity and nucleotide diversity of yak were 0.979 +/- 0.0039 and 0.00237 +/- 0.00076, respectively. Phylogenetic tree and network analysis showed that yak had three highly differentiated genetic branches with high support rate. The differentiation time of clades I and II were about 0.4328 Ma, and the differentiation time of clades (I and II) and III were 0.5654 Ma. Yushu yak is shared by all haplogroups. Most (94.70%) of the genetic variation occurred within populations, and only 5.30% of the genetic variation occurred between populations. The classification showed that yaks and wild yaks were first clustered together, and yaks were clustered with American bison as a whole. Altitude had the highest impact on the distribution of yaks. Conclusions Yaks have high genetic diversity and yak populations have experienced population expansion and lack obvious phylogeographic structure. During the glacial period, yaks had at least three or more glacial refugia.
To comprehensively understand the characteristics of the GH3 gene family in tea plants (Camellia sinensis), we identified 17 CsGH3 genes and analyzed their physicochemical properties, phylogenetic relationships, gene structures, promoters, and expression patterns in different tissues. The study showed that the 17 CsGH3 genes are distributed on 9 chromosomes, and based on evolutionary analysis, the CsGH3 members were divided into three subgroups. Gene duplication analysis revealed that segmental duplications have a significant impact on the amplification of CsGH3 genes. In addition, we identified and classified cis-elements in the CsGH3 gene promoters and detected elements related to plant hormone responses and non-biotic stress responses. Through expression pattern analysis, we observed tissue-specific expression of CsGH3.3 and CsGH3.10 in flower buds and roots. Moreover, based on predictive analysis of upstream regulatory transcription factors of CsGH3, we identified the potential transcriptional regulatory role of gibberellin response factor CsDELLA in CsGH3.14 and CsGH3.15. In this study, we found that CsGH3 genes are involved in a wide range of activities, such as growth and development, stress response, and transcription. This is the first report on CsGH3 genes and their potential roles in tea plants. In conclusion, these results provide a theoretical basis for elucidating the role of GH3 genes in the development of perennial woody plants and offer new insights into the synergistic effects of multiple hormones on plant growth and development in tea plants.
BackgroundAs an emerging food crop with high nutritional value, quinoa has been favored by consumers in recent years; however, flooding, as an abiotic stress, seriously affects its growth and development. Currently, reports on the molecular mechanisms related to quinoa waterlogging stress responses are lacking; accordingly, the core genes related to these processes were explored via Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA).ResultsBased on the transcriptome data, WGCNA was used to construct a co-expression network of weighted genes associated with flooding resistance-associated physiological traits and metabolites. Here, 16 closely related co-expression modules were obtained, and 10 core genes with the highest association with the target traits were mined from the two modules. Functional annotations revealed the biological processes and metabolic pathways involved in waterlogging stress, and four candidates related to flooding resistance, specifically AP2/ERF, MYB, bHLH, and WRKY-family TFs, were also identified.ConclusionsThese results provide clues to the identification of core genes for quinoa underlying quinoa waterlogging stress responses. This could ultimately provide a theoretical foundation for breeding new quinoa varieties with flooding tolerance.
BackgroundCircRNAs are a class of noncoding RNAs with tissue- and development-specific expression characteristics. In many mammals, primordial follicle development begins in the embryonic stage. However, the study of circRNAs in primordial follicle development in mice has not been reported.ResultsIn this study, ovaries were collected from mouse foetuses at 15.5 days post coitus (dpc) and 17.5 dpc, which are two key stages of primordial follicle development. A total of 4785 circRNAs were obtained by using RNA-seq. Of these, 83 differentially expressed circRNAs were identified. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses showed that these differential circRNAs were mainly involved in the regulation of reproductive development. Through qRT-PCR, back-splice sequence detection and enzyme digestion protection experiments, we found that circ-009346, circ-014674, circ-017054 and circ-008296 were indeed circular. Furthermore, circ-009346, circ-014674 and circ-017054 were identified as three key circRNAs by analysing their expression in the ovaries of mice at different developmental stages. The circRNA-miRNA-mRNA interaction network was constructed and validated for target miRNA and mRNA using qRT-PCR. The interacting genes circ-009346, circ-014674, and circ-017054 were subjected to KEGG enrichment analysis. We found that circ-014674 may participate in the assembly and reserve of primordial follicles through oestrogen and the Janus kinase (JAK) signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signalling pathway (JAK-SATA). Circ-009346 and circ-017054 may have similar functions and are involved in the activation and growth of primordial follicles through the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signalling pathways.ConclusionsBased on our findings, three circRNAs associated with primordial follicle development were identified, and their potential mechanisms of regulating primordial follicle development were revealed. These findings will help us better understand the molecular mechanism of circRNAs in primordial follicles and provide important references and targets for the development of primordial follicles.
BackgroundFishes are susceptible to hypoxia stress, while the common carp is known for its high tolerance to hypoxia. The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway directly regulates the cell's response to hypoxia. Still, it is currently unknown which members of the hif-alpha genes are present in common carp and their specific functions.ResultsIn this study, we found that the hif-1 alpha, hif-2 alpha, and hif-3 alpha genes of common carp all contained twice the number of copies of their orthologs in zebrafish. Common carp has four copies of the hif-1 alpha gene, of which the two hif-1 alpha a genes were expressed at low levels in the vast majority of tissues, while the two hif-1 alpha b genes were expressed at high levels in multiple tissues. We silenced the two hif-1 alpha b genes using chitosan nanoparticles (CSNPs) carrying siRNA and subjected two groups to hypoxic stress. Transcriptome sequencing results show that whether under normoxia or hypoxia, the number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) caused by silencing the hif-1 alpha b genes in the heart exceeds 1,000, far more than the number of DEGs in the gills or brain. GO enrichment and KEGG enrichment showed that DEGs in the heart were mainly related to immune function and myocardial contraction. DEGs in the gills and brain also enriched many immune-related terms, and some DEGs in the gills were related to iron metabolism and erythropoiesis. Among the paralogs, the two hif-1 alpha a genes were most obviously up-regulated under normoxia, while the hif-3 alpha genes were most obviously up-regulated under hypoxia. We did not find any downstream genes of the HIF pathway that were specifically regulated by the hif-1 alpha b genes.ConclusionsThe main effect site of the common carp hif-1 alpha b genes is the heart, and their main functions are to regulate immune response and myocardial contraction. Their functions are partially redundant with the hif-1 alpha a genes and hif-3 alpha genes. When their expressions are inhibited, the expression of hif-1 alpha a genes or hif-3 alpha genes would be up-regulated in specific contexts, thereby compensating for their loss of function. The downstream genes of the HIF pathway in common carp may be generally regulated by multiple hif-alpha genes.
The most widely practiced strategy for constructing the deep learning (DL) prediction model for drug resistance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) involves the adoption of ready-made and state-of-the-art architectures usually proposed for non-biological problems. However, the ultimate goal is to construct a customized model for predicting the drug resistance of MTB and eventually for the biological phenotypes based on genotypes. Here, we constructed a DL training framework to standardize and modularize each step during the training process using the latest tensorflow 2 API. A systematic and comprehensive evaluation of each module in the three currently representative models, including Convolutional Neural Network, Denoising Autoencoder, and Wide & Deep, which were adopted by CNNGWP, DeepAMR, and WDNN, respectively, was performed in this framework regarding module contributions in order to assemble a novel model with proper dedicated modules. Based on the whole-genome level mutations, a de novo learning method was developed to overcome the intrinsic limitations of previous models that rely on known drug resistance-associated loci. A customized DL model with the multilayer perceptron architecture was constructed and achieved a competitive performance (the mean sensitivity and specificity were 0.90 and 0.87, respectively) compared to previous ones. The new model developed was applied in an end-to-end user-friendly graphical tool named TB-DROP (TuBerculosis Drug Resistance Optimal Prediction: https://github.com/nottwy/TB-DROP), in which users only provide sequencing data and TB-DROP will complete analysis within several minutes for one sample. Our study contributes to both a new strategy of model construction and clinical application of deep learning-based drug-resistance prediction methods.
Background Chinese cherry [Cerasus pseudocerasus (Lindl.) G.Don] (syn. Prunus pseudocerasus Lindl.) is an economically important fruiting cherry species with a diverse range of attractive colors, spanning from the lightest yellow to the darkest black purple. However, the MYB transcription factors involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis underlying fruit color variation in Chinese cherry remain unknown. Results In this study, we characterized the R2R3-MYB gene family of Chinese cherry by genome-wide identification and compared it with those of 10 Rosaceae relatives and Arabidopsis thaliana. A total of 1490 R2R3-MYBs were classified into 43 subfamilies, which included 29 subfamilies containing both Rosaceae MYBs and AtMYBs. One subfamily (S45) contained only Rosaceae MYBs, while three subfamilies (S12, S75, and S77) contained only AtMYBs. The variation in gene numbers within identical subfamilies among different species and the absence of certain subfamilies in some species indicated the species-specific expansion within MYB gene family in Chinese cherry and its relatives. Segmental and tandem duplication events primarily contributed to the expansion of Chinese cherry R2R3-CpMYBs. The duplicated gene pairs underwent purifying selection during evolution after duplication events. Phylogenetic relationships and transcript profiling revealed that CpMYB10 and CpMYB4 are involved in the regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis in Chinese cherry fruits. Expression patterns, transient overexpression and VIGS results confirmed that CpMYB10 promotes anthocyanin accumulation in the fruit skin, while CpMYB4 acts as a repressor, inhibiting anthocyanin biosynthesis of Chinese cherry. Conclusions This study provides a comprehensive and systematic analysis of R2R3-MYB gene family in Chinese cherry and Rosaceae relatives, and identifies two regulators, CpMYB10 and CpMYB4, involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis in Chinese cherry. These results help to develop and utilize the potential functions of anthocyanins in Chinese cherry.
Background Artemisia selengensis, classified within the genus Artemisia of the Asteraceae family, is a perennial herb recognized for its dual utility in culinary and medicinal domains. There are few studies on the chloroplast genome of A. selengensis, and the phylogeographic classification is vague, which makes phylogenetic analysis and evolutionary studies very difficult. Results The chloroplast genomes of 10 A. selengensis in this study were highly conserved in terms of gene content, gene order, and gene intron number. The genome lengths ranged from 151,148 to 151,257 bp and were typical of a quadripartite structure with a total GC content of approximately 37.5%. The chloroplast genomes of all species encode 133 genes, including 88 protein-coding genes, 37 tRNA genes, and 8 rRNA genes. Due to the contraction and expansion of the inverted repeats (IR), the overlap of ycf1 and ndhF genes occurred at the inverted repeats B (IRB) and short single copy sequence (SSC) boundaries. According to a codon use study, the frequent base in the chloroplast genome of A. selengensis' third codon position was A/T. The number of SSR repeats was 42-44, most of which were single nucleotide A/T repeats. Sequence alignment analysis of the chloroplast genome showed that variable regions were mainly distributed in single copy regions, nucleotide diversity values of 0 to 0.009 were calculated by sliding window analysis, 8 mutation hotspot regions were detected, and coding regions were more conserved than non-coding regions. Analysis of non-synonymous substitution (Ka) and synonymous substitution (Ks) revealed that accD, rps12, petB, and atpF genes were affected by positive selection and no genes were affected by neutral selection. Based on the findings of the phylogenetic analysis, Artemisia selengensis was sister to the genus Artemisia Chrysanthemum and formed a monophyletic group with other Artemisia genera. Conclusions In this research, the present study systematically compared the chloroplast genomic features of A. selengensis and provided important information for the study of the chloroplast genome of A. selengensis and the evolutionary relationships among Asteraceae species.
Background Homeodomain-leucine zipper (HD-Zip) transcription factors are plant-specific and play important roles in plant defense against environmental stresses. Identification and functional studies have been carried out in model plants such as rice, Arabidopsis thaliana, and poplar, but comprehensive analysis on the HD-Zip family of Salix suchowensis have not been reported. Results A total of 55 HD-Zip genes were identified in the willow genome, unevenly distributed on 18 chromosomes except for chromosome 19. And segmental duplication events containing SsHD-Zip were detected on all chromosomes except chromosomes 13 and 19. The SsHD-Zip were classified into 4 subfamilies subfamilies (I-IV) according to the evolutionary analysis, and members of each subfamily shared similar domain structure and gene structure. The combination of GO annotation and promoter analysis showed that SsHD-Zip genes responded to multiple abiotic stresses. Furthermore, the results of qPCR analysis showed that the SsHD-Zip I gene exhibited different degrees of expression under salt stress, PEG treatment and heat treatment. Moreover, there was a synergistic effect between SsHD-Zip I genes under stress conditions based on coregulatory networks analysis. Conclusions In this study, HD-Zip transcription factors were systematically identified and analyzed at the whole genome level. These results preliminarily clarified the structural characteristics and related functions of willow HD-Zip family members, and it was found that SsHox34, SsHox36 and SsHox51 genes were significantly involved in the response to various stresses. Together, these findings laid the foundation for further research on the resistance functions of willow HD-Zip genes.
Background The caffeoyl-CoA-O methyltransferase (CCoAOMT) family plays a crucial role in the oxidative methylation of phenolic substances and is involved in various plant processes, including growth, development, and stress response. However, there is a limited understanding of the interactions among CCoAOMT protein members in tea plants. Results In this study, we identified 10 members of the CsCCoAOMT family in the genome of Camellia sinensis (cultivar 'HuangDan'), characterized by conserved gene structures and motifs. These CsCCoAOMT members were located on six different chromosomes (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 14). Based on phylogenetic analysis, CsCCoAOMT can be divided into two groups: I and II. Notably, the CsCCoAOMT members of group Ia are likely to be candidate genes involved in lignin biosynthesis. Moreover, through the yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) assay, we established protein interaction networks for the CsCCoAOMT family, revealing 9 pairs of members with interaction relationships. Conclusions We identified the CCoAOMT gene family in Camellia sinensis and conducted a comprehensive analysis of their classifications, phylogenetic and synteny relationships, gene structures, protein interactions, tissue-specific expression patterns, and responses to various stresses. Our findings shed light on the evolution and composition of CsCCoAOMT. Notably, the observed interaction among CCoAOMT proteins suggests the potential formation of the O-methyltransferase (OMT) complex during the methylation modification process, expanding our understanding of the functional roles of this gene family in diverse biological processes.
BackgroundGenomic mating (GM) can effectively control the growth rate of inbreeding in population and achieve long-term sustainable genetic progress. However, the design of GM method and assessment of its effects during long-term selection have not been fully explored in beef cattle breeding.ResultsIn this study, we constructed a simulated population based on the real genotypes of Huaxi cattle, where five generations of simulated breeding were carried out using the genomic optimal contribution selection (GOCS), genetic algorithms strategy and three traditional mating strategies. During the breeding process, genetic parameters including average genomic estimated breeding value (GEBV), genetic gain values (Delta G\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\Delta G$$\end{document}), the rate of inbreeding values (Delta F\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\Delta F$$\end{document}) were calculated and compared across generations. Our results showed that the GM method could significantly improve the genetic gain while effectively controlling the inbreeding accumulation within the population. When using the GM method, there was an increase in genetic gain for Huaxi cattle ranging from 1.1% to 25.6% compared to traditional mating strategy, with inbreeding decreasing in the range of 5.8% to 36.2%. Validation using the real dataset from Huaxi cattle further confirmed our findings from the simulated study, offspring populations using the GM strategy exhibited a 7.3% increase in genetic gain compared to positive assortative mating.ConclusionsThese findings suggest that the GM method shows potential for achieving sustainable genetic gain and could be utilized during long-term selection in beef cattle breeding.
BackgroundZ-DNA, a left-handed helical form of DNA, plays a significant role in genomic stability and gene regulation. Its formation, associated with high GC content and repetitive sequences, is linked to genomic instability, potentially leading to large-scale deletions and contributing to phenotypic diversity and evolutionary adaptation.ResultsIn this study, we analyzed the density of Z-DNA-prone motifs of 154 avian genomes using the non-B DNA Motif Search Tool (nBMST). Our findings indicate a higher prevalence of Z-DNA motifs in promoter regions across all avian species compared to other genomic regions. A negative correlation was observed between Z-DNA density and developmental time in birds, suggesting that species with shorter developmental periods tend to have higher Z-DNA densities. This relationship implies that Z-DNA may influence the timing and regulation of development in avian species. Furthermore, Z-DNA density showed associations with traits such as body mass, egg mass, and genome size, highlighting the complex interactions between genome architecture and phenotypic characteristics. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed that Z-DNA motifs are enriched in genes involved in nucleic acid binding, kinase activity, and translation regulation, suggesting a role in fine-tuning gene expression essential for cellular functions and responses to environmental changes. Additionally, the potential of Z-DNA to drive genomic instability and facilitate adaptive evolution underscores its importance in shaping phenotypic diversity.ConclusionsThis study emphasizes the role of Z-DNA as a dynamic genomic element contributing to gene regulation, genomic stability, and phenotypic diversity in avian species. Future research should experimentally validate these associations and explore the molecular mechanisms by which Z-DNA influences avian biology.
Background WOX genes are a class of plant-specific transcription factors. The WUSCHEL-related homeobox (WOX) family is a member of the homeobox transcription factor superfamily. Previous studies have shown that WOX members play important roles in plant growth and development. However, studies of the WOX gene family in blueberry plants have not been reported. Results In order to understand the biological function of the WOX gene family in blueberries, bioinformatics were used methods to identify WOX gene family members in the blueberry genome, and analyzed the basic physical and chemical properties, gene structure, gene motifs, promoter cis-acting elements, chromosome location, evolutionary relationships, expression pattern of these family members and predicted their functions. Finally, 12 genes containing the WOX domain were identified and found to be distributed on eight chromosomes. Phylogenetic tree analysis showed that the blueberry WOX gene family had three major branches: ancient branch, middle branch, and WUS branch. Blueberry WOX gene family protein sequences differ in amino acid number, molecular weight, isoelectric point and hydrophobicity. Predictive analysis of promoter cis-acting elements showed that the promoters of the VdWOX genes contained abundant light response, hormone, and stress response elements. The VdWOX genes were induced to express in both stems and leaves in response to salt and drought stress. Conclusions Our results provided comprehensive characteristics of the WOX gene family and important clues for further exploration of its role in the growth, development and resistance to various stress in blueberry plants.
Background Genetically modified (GM) crop plants with transgenic expression of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) pesticidal proteins are used to manage feeding damage by pest insects. The durability of this technology is threatened by the selection for resistance in pest populations. The molecular mechanism(s) involved in insect physiological response or evolution of resistance to Bt is not fully understood.Results To investigate the response of a susceptible target insect to Bt, the soybean pod borer, Leguminivora glycinivorella (Lepidoptera: Tortricidae), was exposed to soybean, Glycine max, expressing Cry1Ac pesticidal protein or the non-transgenic parental cultivar. Assessment of larval changes in gene expression was facilitated by a third-generation sequenced and scaffolded chromosome-level assembly of the L. glycinivorella genome (657.4 Mb; 27 autosomes + Z chromosome), and subsequent structural annotation of 18,197 RefSeq gene models encoding 23,735 putative mRNA transcripts. Exposure of L. glycinivorella larvae to transgenic Cry1Ac G. max resulted in prediction of significant differential gene expression for 204 gene models (64 up- and 140 down-regulated) and differential splicing among isoforms for 10 genes compared to unexposed cohorts. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) included putative peritrophic membrane constituents, orthologs of Bt receptor-encoding genes previously linked or associated with Bt resistance, and those involved in stress responses. Putative functional Gene Ontology (GO) annotations assigned to DEGs were significantly enriched for 36 categories at GO level 2, respectively. Most significantly enriched cellular component (CC), biological process (BP), and molecular function (MF) categories corresponded to vacuolar and microbody, transport and metabolic processes, and binding and reductase activities. The DEGs in enriched GO categories were biased for those that were down-regulated (>= 0.783), with only MF categories GTPase and iron binding activities were bias for up-regulation genes.Conclusions This study provides insights into pathways and processes involved larval response to Bt intoxication, which may inform future unbiased investigations into mechanisms of resistance that show no evidence of alteration in midgut receptors.
Background The NAC TF family is widely involved in plant responses to various types of stress. Red clover (Trifolium pratense) is a high-quality legume, and the study of NAC genes in red clover has not been comprehensive. The aim of this study was to analyze the NAC gene family of red clover at the whole-genome level and explore its potential role in the Pb stress response. Results In this study, 72 TpNAC genes were identified from red clover; collinearity analysis showed that there were 5 pairs of large fragment replicators of TpNAC genes, and red clover was found to be closely related to Medicago truncatula. Interestingly, the TpNAC genes have more homologs in Arabidopsis thaliana than in soybean (Glycine max). There are many elements in the TpNAC genes promoters that respond to stress. Gene expression analysis showed that all the TpNAC genes responded to Pb stress. qRT-PCR showed that the expression levels of TpNAC29 and TpNAC42 were significantly decreased after Pb stress. Protein interaction network analysis showed that 21 TpNACs and 23 other genes participated in the interaction. In addition, the TpNAC proteins had three possible 3D structures, and the secondary structure of these proteins were mainly of other types. These results indicated that most TpNAC members were involved in the regulation of Pb stress in red clover. Conclusion These results suggest that most TpNAC members are involved in the regulation of Pb stress in red clover. TpNAC members play an important role in the response of red clover to Pb stress.
Background Phosphorus plays a key role in plant adaptation to adversity and plays a positive role in the yield and quality formation of apples. Genes of the SPX domain-containing family are widely involved in the regulation of phosphorus signalling networks. However, the mechanisms controlling phosphorus deficiency are not completely understood in self-rooted apple stock. Results In this study, 26 members of the apple SPX gene family were identified by genome-wide analysis, and further divided into four subfamilies (SPX, SPX-MFS, SPX-EXS, and SPX-RING) based on their structural features. The chromosome distribution and gene duplications of MdSPXs were also examined. The promoter regions of MdSPXs were enriched for multiple biotic/abiotic stresses, hormone responses and typical P1BS-related elements. Analysis of the expression levels of 26 MdSPXs showed that some members were remarkably induced when subjected to low phosphate (Pi) stress, and in particular MdSPX2, MdSPX3, and MdPHO1.5 exhibited an intense response to low Pi stress. MdSPX2 and MdSPX3 showed significantly divergent expression levels in low Pi sensitive and insensitive apple species. Protein interaction networks were predicted for 26 MdSPX proteins. The interaction of MdPHR1 with MdSPX2, MdSPX3, MdSPX4, and MdSPX6 was demonstrated by yeast two-hybrid assay, suggesting that these proteins might be involved in the Pi-signaling pathway by interacting with MdPHR1. Conclusion This research improved the understanding of the apple SPX gene family and contribute to future biological studies of MdSPX genes in self-rooted apple stock.
BackgroundCervical cancer (CC) causes more than 311,000 deaths annually worldwide. The integration of human papillomavirus (HPV) is a crucial genetic event that contributes to cervical carcinogenesis. Despite HPV DNA integration is known to disrupt the genomic architecture of both the host and viral genomes in CC, the complexity of this process remains largely unexplored.ResultsIn this study, we conducted whole-genome sequencing (WGS) at 55-65X coverage utilizing the PacBio long-read sequencing platform in SiHa and HeLa cells, followed by comprehensive analyses of the sequence data to elucidate the complexity of HPV integration. Firstly, our results demonstrated that PacBio long-read sequencing effectively identifies HPV integration breakpoints with comparable accuracy to targeted-capture Next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods. Secondly, we constructed detailed models of complex integrated genome structures that included both the HPV genome and nearby regions of the human genome by utilizing PacBio long-read WGS. Thirdly, our sequencing results revealed the occurrence of a wide variety of genome-wide structural variations (SVs) in SiHa and HeLa cells. Additionally, our analysis further revealed a potential correlation between changes in gene expression levels and SVs on chromosome 13 in the genome of SiHa cells.ConclusionsUsing PacBio long-read sequencing, we have successfully constructed complex models illustrating HPV integrated genome structures in SiHa and HeLa cells. This accomplishment serves as a compelling demonstration of the valuable capabilities of long-read sequencing in detecting and characterizing HPV genomic integration structures within human cells. Furthermore, these findings offer critical insights into the complex process of HPV16 and HPV18 integration and their potential contribution to the development of cervical cancer.
BackgroundThe number of spikelets per spike is a key trait that affects the yield of bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Identification of the QTL for spikelets per spike and its genetic effects that could be used in molecular assistant breeding in the future.ResultsIn this study, four recombinant inbred line (RIL) populations were generated and used, having YuPi branching wheat (YP), with Supernumerary Spikelets (SS) phenotype, as a common parent. QTL (QSS.sicau-2 A and QSS.sicau-2D) related to SS trait were mapped on chromosomes 2 A and 2D through bulked segregant exome sequencing (BSE-Seq). Fourteen molecular markers were further developed within the localization interval, and QSS.sicau-2 A was narrowed to 3.0 cM covering 7.6 Mb physical region of the reference genome, explaining 13.7 - 15.9% the phenotypic variance. Similarly, the QSS.sicau-2D was narrowed to 1.8 cM covering 2.4 Mb physical region of the reference genome, and it explained 27.4 - 32.9% the phenotypic variance. These two QTL were validated in three different genetic backgrounds using the linked markers. QSS.sicau-2 A was identified as WFZP-A, and QSS.sicau-2D was identified a novel locus, different to the previously identified WFZP-D. Based on the gene expression patterns, gene annotation and sequence analysis, TraesCS2D03G0260700 was predicted to be a potential candidate gene for QSS.sicau-2D.ConclusionTwo significant QTL for SS, namely QSS.sicau-2 A and QSS.sicau-2D were identified in multiple environments were identified and their effect in diverse genetic populations was assessed. QSS.sicau-2D is a novel QTL associated with the SS trait, with TraesCS2D03G0260700 predicted as its candidate gene.
The establishment and maintenance of spermatogenesis is a complex process involving a vast of regulatory pathways. There is growing evidence revealing that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) play important roles in regulating testicular development and spermatogenesis in a stage-specific way. However, our understanding of how lncRNA regulates testicular development and spermatogenesis in black goats is quite limited. In the current study, we screened the transcriptomes (lncRNA and mRNA) of testicular from Guangxi black goats before puberty (3 days old, D3; 30 days old, D30), puberty (90 days old, D90) and postpuberty (180 days old, D180), in order to identify the lncRNA interaction with mRNAs contributes to goat spermatogenesis. The RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis showed that there were 1211, 12,180, 834 differential lncRNAs and 1196, 8838,269 differential mRNAs at the ages of D30 vs. D3, D90 vs. D30, and D180 vs. D90. The lncRNAs showed the most significantly changes from D30 to D90, which indicated that D90 was a key node of lncRNAs participated in the regulation of testicular development and spermatogenesis in black goat. According to functional enrichment analysis of GO and KEGG, we found that differentially expressed lncRNAs (DE lncRNAs) and their target genes regulated spermatogenesis through signal pathways including MAPK, Ras, and PI3K-Akt. Using cis- and trans-acting, 39 DE lncRNAs-targeted genes were found to be enriched for male reproduction. Of these, LOC108635509, which specific expressed in testis and upregulated the expression levels at D90, was found participated in the regulation of testicular development through promoting the proliferation of Sertoli cells (SCs). Overall, this study provides new insight into the regulatory mechanisms that support spermatogenesis and testicular development in black goats.
BackgroundOdontotermes formosanus (Shiraki) is a highly damaging agroforestry pest. Serratia marcescens is a broad-spectrum insecticidal pathogen and is highly lethal to O. formosanus. However, little is known about the mechanism between them. To improve the biological control of pests, a more in-depth analysis of the interactions between the pests and the pathogens is essential.ResultsWe used RNA-seq, enzyme activity assays and real-time fluorescent quantitative PCR (qPCR) to explore the defense responses of O. formosanus against SM1. RNA-seq results showed that 1,160, 2,531 and 4,536 genes were differentially expressed at 3, 6 and 12 h after SM1 infection, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) results indicated that immune response and energy metabolism were involved in the defense of O. formosanus against SM1. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and ROS synthesis genes were significantly elevated, and the antioxidant system were induced in O. formosanus after SM1 infection. In addition, the cellular immune genes were affected, and the Toll, immune deficiency (Imd), Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT), c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) and melanization pathways were activated. In vitro, Oftermicin, an antimicrobial peptide, had a significantly inhibitory effect on SM1. Furthermore, the expression levels and enzyme activities of phosphofructokinase (PFK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) in glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycles were increased.ConclusionsOur results clearly demonstrated that O. formosanus defended against SM1 by activating the antioxidant system, innate immunity and energy metabolism. This study would provide useful information for the development of biological controls of O. formosanus.
BackgroundRNA sequencing (RNA-seq) is widely used for gene expression profiling and quantification. Quantitative RNA sequencing usually requires cell counting and spike-in, which is not always applicable to many samples. Here, we present a novel quantitative RNA sequencing method independent of spike-ins or cell counting, named siqRNA-seq, which can be used to quantitatively profile gene expression by utilizing gDNA as an internal control. Single-stranded library preparation used in siqRNA-seq profiles gDNA and cDNA with equal efficiency.ResultsTo quantify mRNA expression levels, siqRNA-seq constructs libraries for total nucleic acid to establish a model for expression quantification. Compared to Relative Quantification RNA-seq, siqRNA-seq is technically reliable and reproducible for expression profiling but also can sequence reads from gDNA which can be used as an internal reference for accurate expression quantification. Applying siqRNA-seq to investigate the effects of actinomycin D on gene expression in HEK293T cells, we show the advantages of siqRNA-seq in accurately identifying differentially expressed genes between samples with distinct global mRNA levels. Furthermore, we analyzed factors influencing the downward trend of gene expression regulated by ActD using siqRNA-seq and found that mRNA with m6A modification exhibited a faster decay rate compared to mRNA without m6A modification. Additionally, applying this technique to the quantitative analysis of seven tumor cell lines revealed a high degree of diversity in total mRNA expression among tumor cell lines.ConclusionsCollectively, siqRNA-seq is a spike-in independent quantitative RNA sequencing method, which creatively uses gDNA as an internal reference to absolutely quantify gene expression. We consider that siqRNA-seq provides a convenient and versatile method to quantitatively profile the mRNA landscape in various samples.
Next-generation risk assessment relies on mechanistic data from new approach methods, including transcriptome data. Various technologies, such as high-throughput targeted sequencing methods and microarray technologies based on hybridization with complementary probes, are used to determine differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The integration of data from different technologies requires a good understanding of the differences arising from the use of various technologies.To better understand the differences between the TempO-Seq platform and Affymetrix chip technology, whole-genome data for the volatile compound dimethylamine were compared. Selected DEGs were also confirmed using RTqPCR validation. Although the overlap of DEGs between TempO-Seq and Affymetrix was no higher than 37%, a comparison of the gene regulation in terms of log2fold changes revealed a very high concordance. RTqPCR confirmed the majority of DEGs from either platform in the examined dataset. Only a few conflicts were found (11%), while 22% were not confirmed, and 3% were not detected.Despite the observed differences between the two platforms, both can be validated using RTqPCR. Here we highlight some of the differences between the two platforms and discuss their applications in toxicology.
Background Alfalfa is a perennial forage crop of high importance, but its cultivation is often affected by drought stress. Currently, the investigation of drought-related small RNAs is a popular research topic to uncover plant drought resistance mechanisms. Among these small RNAs, microRNA166 (miR166) is associated with drought in numerous plant species. Initial small RNA sequencing studies have shown that miR166 is highly responsive to exogenous nitric oxide (NO) and drought. Therefore, analyzing the expression of Msa-miR166 under nitric oxide and drought treatment is significant. Result Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the miR166 family is widely distributed among plants, ranging from mosses to eudicots, with significant distribution differences between species. The evolutionary degree of Msa-miR166s is highly similar to that of Barrel medic (Medicago truncatula) and Soybean (Glycine max), but significantly different from the model plant Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). It is suggested that there are no significant differences in miR166s within the species, and members of Msa-miR166s can form a typical stem-loop. The lowest level of exogenous nitric oxide was observed in Msa-miR166s under drought stress, followed by individual drought, and the highest level was observed after removing endogenous nitric oxide. Conclusion In response to short-term drought, Msa-miR166s down-regulate expression in alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.). Exogenous nitric oxide can reduce the expression of Msa-miR166s in response to short-term drought. These findings suggest that Msa-miR166e-5p is responsive to environmental changes. The expression levels of target genes showed an opposite trend to Msa-miR166s, verifying the accuracy of Degradome sequencing in the early stage. This suggests that alfalfa experiences drought stress when regulated by exogenous nitric oxide, targeting HD ZIP-III, FRI, and CoA ligase genes. Additionally, the expression of Msa-miR166s in response to drought stress varies between leaves and roots, indicating spatiotemporal specificity.
Salinity adaptation is an important issue in aquaculture. Understanding the immediate-early response to salinity stress helps in comprehending this process. In vitro experiments using cell lines can explain cell-independent reactions without the involvement of hormones in vivo. In this study, salinity stress experiments were conducted using cell line derived from the gills of Gymnocypris przewalskii (GPG cell line) to isolate immediate-early response-related genes and miRNAs using transcriptomics, followed by bioinformatics analysis. The results showed that intracellular free Ca2+ appeared to be a key factor in cell sensing and initiating downstream cell signaling in response to external salinity. Additionally, cell apoptosis was the most common feature of salinity stress, with multiple signaling pathways involved in salinity-induced cell apoptosis. Furthermore, MiRNAs played a crucial role in the rapid response to salinity stress by selectively inhibiting the expression of specific genes. Additionally, for the first time in the G. przewalskii genome, Tf2 and TY3 families of transposons were found to have responsive roles to the external salinity stress. This study contributes to a better understanding of osmotic sensing in G. przewalskii and provides theoretical assistance for improving salinity adaptation in aquaculture fish species.
BackgroundTeat number is one of the most important indicators to evaluate the lactation performance of sows, and increasing the teat number has become an important method to improve the economic efficiency of farms. Therefore, it is particularly important to deeply analyze the genetic mechanism of teat number traits in pigs. In this study, we detected Single Nucleotide Ploymorphism (SNP), Insertion-Deletion (InDel) and Structural variant (SV) by high-coverage whole-genome resequencing data, and selected teat number at birth and functional teat number as two types of teat number traits for genome-wide association study (GWAS) to reveal candidate genes associated with pig teat number traits.ResultsIn this study, we used whole genome resequencing data from 560 Yorkshire sows to detect SNPs, InDels and SVs, and performed GWAS for the traits of born teat number and functional teat number, and detected a total of 85 significant variants and screened 214 candidate genes, including HEG1, XYLT1, SULF1, MUC13, VRTN, RAP1A and NPVF. Among them, HEG1 and XYLT1 were the new candidate genes in this study. The co-screening and population validation of multiple traits suggested that HEG1 may have a critical effect on the born teat number.ConclusionOur study shows that more candidate genes associated with pig teat number traits can be identified by GWAS with different variant types. Through large population validation, we found that HEG1 may be a new key candidate gene affecting pig teat number traits. In conclusion, the results of this study provide new information for exploring the genetic mechanisms affecting pig teat number traits and genetic improvement of pigs.
Background In recent years, Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is increasingly accessible to researchers of many fields. However, interpreting its data demands proficiency in multiple programming languages and bioinformatic skills, which limited researchers, without such expertise, exploring information from scRNA-seq data. Therefore, there is a tremendous need to develop easy-to-use software, covering all the aspects of scRNA-seq data analysis.Results We proposed a clear analysis framework for scRNA-seq data, which emphasized the fundamental and crucial roles of cell identity annotation, abstracting the analysis process into three stages: upstream analysis, cell annotation and downstream analysis. The framework can equip researchers with a comprehensive understanding of the analysis procedure and facilitate effective data interpretation. Leveraging the developed framework, we engineered Shaoxia, an analysis platform designed to democratize scRNA-seq analysis by accelerating processing through high-performance computing capabilities and offering a user-friendly interface accessible even to wet-lab researchers without programming expertise.Conclusion Shaoxia stands as a powerful and user-friendly open-source software for automated scRNA-seq analysis, offering comprehensive functionality for streamlined functional genomics studies. Shaoxia is freely accessible at http://www.shaoxia.cloud, and its source code is publicly available at https://github.com/WiedenWei/shaoxia.
BF/C2 is a crucial molecule in the coagulation complement cascade pathway and plays a significant role in the immune response of grass carp through the classical, alternative, and lectin pathways during GCRV infection. In vivo experiments demonstrated that the mRNA expression levels of BF/C2 (A, B) in grass carp positively correlated with GCRV viral replication at various stages of infection. Excessive inflammation leading to death coincided with peak levels of BF/C2 (A, B) mRNA expression and GCRV viral replication. Correspondingly, BF/C2 (A, B) recombinant protein, CIK cells and GCRV co-incubation experiments yielded similar findings. Therefore, 3 h (incubation period) and 9 h (death period) were selected as critical points for this study. Transcriptome sequencing analysis revealed significant differences in the expression of BF/C2A and BF/C2B during different stages of CIK infection with GCRV and compared to the blank control group (PBS). Specifically, the BF/C2A_3 and BF/C2A_9 groups exhibited 2729 and 2228 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), respectively, with 1436 upregulated and 1293 downregulated in the former, and 1324 upregulated and 904 downregulated in the latter. The BF/C2B_3 and BF/C2B_9 groups showed 2303 and 1547 DEGs, respectively, with 1368 upregulated and 935 downregulated in the former, and 818 upregulated and 729 downregulated in the latter. KEGG functional enrichment analysis of these DEGs identified shared pathways between BF/C2A and PBS groups at 3 and 9 h, including the C-type lectin receptor signaling pathway, protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, Salmonella infection, apoptosis, tight junction, and adipocytokine signaling pathway. Additionally, the BF/C2B groups at 3 and 9 h shared pathways related to protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and biosynthesis of amino acids. The mRNA levels of these DEGs were validated in cellular models, confirming consistency with the sequencing results. In addition, the mRNA expression levels of these candidate genes (mapk1, il1b, rela, nfkbiab, akt3a, hyou1, hsp90b1, dnajc3a et al.) in the head kidney, kidney, liver and spleen of grass carp immune tissue were significantly different from those of the control group by BF/C2 (A, B) protein injection in vivo. These candidate genes play an important role in the response of BF/C2 (A, B) to GCRV infection and it also further confirmed that BF/C2 (A, B) of grass carp plays an important role in coping with GCRV infection.
BackgroundCalmodulin-binding transcription activator (CAMTA) is comprised of a group of transcription factors and plays an important role in the Ca2+ signaling pathway, mediating various molecular responses via interactions with other transcription factors and binding to the promoter region of specific genes. Mung beans (Vigna radiata) are one of the most commonly consumed commodities in Asia. To date, CAMTA proteins have not been characterized in this important crop plant.ResultsEight paralogous VrCAMTA genes were identified and found to be distributed on five of the 11 chromosomes. The proteins possessed CG-1 DNA-binding domains with bipartite NLS signals, ankyrin domains, CaM-binding IQ motifs, and CaM-binding domain (CaMBD). The 2 kb upstream regions of VrCAMTA genes contained sequence motifs of abscisic acid-responsive elements (ABRE) and ethylene-responsive elements (ERE), and binding sites for transcription factors of the bZIP and bHLH domains. Analysis of RNA-seq data from a public repository revealed ubiquitous expression of the VrCAMTA genes, as VrCAMTA1 was expressed at the highest level in seedling leaves, whereas VrCAMTA8 was expressed at the lowest level, which agreed with the RT-qPCR analysis performed on the first true leaves. On day four after leaf emergence, all VrCAMTA genes were upregulated, with VrCAMTA1 exhibiting the highest degree of upregulation. In darkness on day 4, upregulation was not observed in most VrCAMTA genes, except VrCAMTA7, for which a low degree of upregulation was found, whereas no difference was found in VrCAMTA8 expression between light and dark conditions. Treatment with calcium ionophores enhanced VrCAMTA expression under light and/or dark conditions at different times after leaf emergence, suggesting that calcium signaling is involved in the light-induced upregulation of VrCAMTA gene expression.ConclusionsThe expression dependence of nearly all VrCAMTA genes on light and calcium signaling suggests their possible differential but likely complementary roles during the early stages of mung bean growth and development.
BackgroundCancers exhibit complex transcriptomes with aberrant splicing that induces isoform-level differential expression compared to non-diseased tissues. Transcriptomic profiling using short-read sequencing has utility in providing a cost-effective approach for evaluating isoform expression, although short-read assembly displays limitations in the accurate inference of full-length transcripts. Long-read RNA sequencing (Iso-Seq), using the Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) platform, can overcome such limitations by providing full-length isoform sequence resolution which requires no read assembly and represents native expressed transcripts. A constraint of the Iso-Seq protocol is due to fewer reads output per instrument run, which, as an example, can consequently affect the detection of lowly expressed transcripts. To address these deficiencies, we developed a concatenation workflow, PacBio Full-Length Isoform Concatemer Sequencing (PB_FLIC-Seq), designed to increase the number of unique, sequenced PacBio long-reads thereby improving overall detection of unique isoforms. In addition, we anticipate that the increase in read depth will help improve the detection of moderate to low-level expressed isoforms.ResultsIn sequencing a commercial reference (Spike-In RNA Variants; SIRV) with known isoform complexity we demonstrated a 3.4-fold increase in read output per run and improved SIRV recall when using the PB_FLIC-Seq method compared to the same samples processed with the Iso-Seq protocol. We applied this protocol to a translational cancer case, also demonstrating the utility of the PB_FLIC-Seq method for identifying differential full-length isoform expression in a pediatric diffuse midline glioma compared to its adjacent non-malignant tissue. Our data analysis revealed increased expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) genes within the tumor sample, including an isoform of the Secreted Protein Acidic and Cysteine Rich (SPARC) gene that was expressed 11,676-fold higher than in the adjacent non-malignant tissue. Finally, by using the PB_FLIC-Seq method, we detected several cancer-specific novel isoforms.ConclusionThis work describes a concatenation-based methodology for increasing the number of sequenced full-length isoform reads on the PacBio platform, yielding improved discovery of expressed isoforms. We applied this workflow to profile the transcriptome of a pediatric diffuse midline glioma and adjacent non-malignant tissue. Our findings of cancer-specific novel isoform expression further highlight the importance of long-read sequencing for characterization of complex tumor transcriptomes.
BackgroundSugar beets (Beta vulgaris L.) are grown worldwide and suffer economic loss annually due to curly top disease caused by the beet curly top virus (BCTV). The virus is spread by the beet leafhopper (BLH), Circulifer tenellus Baker. Current management strategies rely on chemical control and planting BCTV-resistant sugar beet genotypes. However, the genetic mechanism underlying BCTV resistance in sugar beet is unknown. This study aimed to determine these mechanisms by comparing a resistant (EL10) and susceptible (FC709-2) sugar beet genotype using host plant suitability (no-choice), host preference (choice) assays, and transcriptomic analysis.ResultsHost plant suitability assays revealed no significant differences in adult survival or nymph production between viruliferous and non-viruliferous BLH on either genotype, suggesting that BCTV resistance is not directly associated with reduced beet leafhopper fitness. However, host preference assays showed that viruliferous BLH preferred settling on the susceptible genotype, FC709-2, compared to the resistant genotype, EL10 whereas the non-viruliferous BLH showed no preference. RNA-sequencing analysis of BCTV-inoculated (viruliferous BLH-fed) and mock-inoculated (non-viruliferous BLH-fed) plants at day 1, 7, or 14 post-inoculations highlighted dynamic and contrasting responses between the two genotypes. The resistant genotype had differentially expressed transcripts (DETs) associated with jasmonic acid and abscisic acid biosynthesis and signaling. DETs associated with stress mitigation mechanisms and reduction in plant primary metabolic processes were also observed. In contrast, the susceptible genotype had DETs associated with opposing phytohormones like salicylic acid and auxin. Moreover, this genotype exhibited an upregulation in DETs involved in volatile organic compounds (VOCs) production and increased primary plant metabolic processes.ConclusionsThese results provide novel insight into the opposing transcriptional responses underlying BCTV resistance and susceptibility in sugar beet. Understanding and classifying the mechanisms of resistance or susceptibility to BCTV infection in sugar beet is beneficial to researchers and plant breeders as it provides a basis for further exploration of the host plant-virus-vector interactions.
Background Somatic embryogenesis (SE) exemplifies the unique developmental plasticity of plant cells. The regulatory processes, including epigenetic modifications controlling embryogenic reprogramming of cell transcriptome, have just started to be revealed. Results To identify the genes of histone acetylation-regulated expression in SE, we analyzed global transcriptomes of Arabidopsis explants undergoing embryogenic induction in response to treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). The TSA-induced and auxin (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid; 2,4-D)-induced transcriptomes were compared. RNA-seq results revealed the similarities of the TSA- and auxin-induced transcriptomic responses that involve extensive deregulation, mostly repression, of the majority of genes. Within the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), we identified the master regulators (transcription factors - TFs) of SE, genes involved in biosynthesis, signaling, and polar transport of auxin and NITRILASE-encoding genes of the function in indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) biosynthesis. TSA-upregulated TF genes of essential functions in auxin-induced SE, included LEC1/LEC2, FUS3, AGL15, MYB118, PHB, PHV, PLTs, and WUS/WOXs. The TSA-induced transcriptome revealed also extensive upregulation of stress-related genes, including those related to stress hormone biosynthesis. In line with transcriptomic data, TSA-induced explants accumulated salicylic acid (SA) and abscisic acid (ABA), suggesting the role of histone acetylation (Hac) in regulating stress hormone-related responses during SE induction. Since mostly the adaxial side of cotyledon explant contributes to SE induction, we also identified organ polarity-related genes responding to TSA treatment, including AIL7/PLT7, RGE1, LBD18, 40, HB32, CBF1, and ULT2. Analysis of the relevant mutants supported the role of polarity-related genes in SE induction. Conclusion The study results provide a step forward in deciphering the epigenetic network controlling embryogenic transition in somatic cells of plants.
Background Multiple enhancers co-regulating the same gene is prevalent and plays a crucial role during development and disease. However, how multiple enhancers coordinate the same gene expression across various cell types remains largely unexplored at genome scale.Results We develop a computational approach that enables the quantitative assessment of enhancer specificity and selectivity across diverse cell types, leveraging enhancer-promoter (E-P) interactions data. We observe two well-known gene regulation patterns controlled by enhancer clusters, which regulate the same gene either in a limited number of cell types (Specific pattern, Spe) or in the majority of cell types (Conserved pattern, Con), both of which are enriched for super-enhancers (SEs). We identify a previously overlooked pattern (Variable pattern, Var) that multiple enhancers link to the same gene, but rarely coexist in the same cell type. These three patterns control the genes associating with distinct biological function and exhibit unique epigenetic features. Specifically, we discover a subset of Var patterns contains Shared enhancers with stable enhancer-promoter interactions in the majority of cell types, which might contribute to maintaining gene expression by recruiting abundant CTCF.Conclusions Together, our findings reveal three distinct E-P regulation patterns across different cell types, providing insights into deciphering the complexity of gene transcriptional regulation.
At the 3' end of the C2 gene in the mammalian TRB locus, a distinct reverse TRBV30 gene (named TRBV31 in mice) has been conserved throughout evolution. In the fully annotated TRB locus of 14 mammals (including six orders), we observed noteworthy variations in the localization and quality of the reverse V30 genes and Recombination Signal Sequences (RSSs) in the gene trees of 13 mammals. Conversely, the forward V29 genes and RSSs were generally consistent with the species tree of their corresponding species. This finding suggested that the evolution of the reverse V30 gene was not synchronous and likely played a crucial role in regulating adaptive immune responses. To further investigate this possibility, we utilized single-cell TCR sequencing (scTCR-seq) and high-throughput sequencing (HTS) to analyze TCR beta CDR3 repertoires from both central and peripheral tissues of Primates (Homo sapiens and Macaca mulatta), Rodentia (Mus musculus: BALB/c, C57BL/6, and Kunming mice), Artiodactyla (Bos taurus and Bubalus bubalis), and Chiroptera (Rhinolophus affinis and Hipposideros armige). Our investigation revealed several novel observations: (1) The reverse V30 gene exhibits classical rearrangement patterns adhering to the '12/23 rule' and the 'D-J rearrangement preceding the V-(D-J) rearrangement'. This results in the formation of rearranged V30-D2J2, V30-D1J1, and V30-D1J2. However, we also identified 'special rearrangement patterns' wherein V30-D rearrangement preceding D-J rearrangement, giving rise to rearranged V30-D2-J1 and forward Vx-D2-J. (2) Compared to the 'deletional rearrangement' (looping out) of forward V1-V29 genes, the reverse V30 gene exhibits preferential utilization with 'inversional rearrangement'. This may be attributed to the shorter distance between the V30 gene and D gene and the 'inversional rearrangement' modes. In summary, in the mammalian TRB locus, the reverse V30 gene has been uniquely preserved throughout evolution and preferentially utilized in V(D)J recombination, potentially serving a significant role in adaptive immunity. These results will pave the way for novel and specialized research into the mechanisms, efficiency, and function of V(D)J recombination in mammals.
Background Asparagus L., widely distributed in the old world is a genus under Asparagaceae, Asparagales. The species of the genus were mainly used as vegetables, traditional medicines as well as ornamental plants. However, the evolution and functions of mitochondrial (Mt) genomes (mitogenomes) remains largely unknown. In this study, the typical herbal medicine A. taliensis and ornamental plant A. setaceus were used to assemble and annotate the mitogenomes, and the resulting mitogenomes were further compared with published mitogenome of A. officinalis for the analysis of their functions in the context of domestication and adaptative evolution. Results The mitochondrial genomes of both A. taliensis and A. setaceus were assembled as complete circular ones. The phylogenetic trees based on conserved protein-coding genes of Mt genomes and whole chloroplast (Cp) genomes showed that, the phylogenetic relationship of the sampled 13 species of Asparagus L. were not exactly consistent. The collinear analyses between the nuclear (Nu) and Mt genomes confirmed the existence of mutual horizontal genes transfers (HGTs) between Nu and Mt genomes within these species. Based on RNAseq data, the Mt RNA editing were predicted and atp1 and ccmB RNA editing of A. taliensis were further confirmed by DNA sequencing. Simultaneously homologous search found 5 Nu coding gene families including pentatricopeptide-repeats (PPRs) involved in Mt RNA editing. Finally, the Mt genome variations, gene expressions and mutual HGTs between Nu and Mt were detected with correlation to the growth and developmental phenotypes respectively. The results suggest that, both Mt and Nu genomes co-evolved and maintained the Mt organella replication and energy production through TCA and oxidative phosphorylation . Conclusion The assembled and annotated complete mitogenomes of both A. taliensis and A. setaceus provide valuable information for their phylogeny and concerted action of Nu and Mt genomes to maintain the energy production system of Asparagus L. in the context of domestication and adaptation to environmental niches.
BackgroundThe study of rodent malaria parasites has significantly advanced our understanding of malaria parasite biology and host responses to parasite infections. There are four well-characterized rodent malaria parasite species (Plasmodium yoelii, P. chabaudi, P. berghei, and P. vinckei). Each species also has multiple strains that cause different disease phenotypes. P. yoelii nigeriensis N67C and N67, two isogenic parasites, are particularly intriguing as they differ in virulence and incite different immune responses in mice. The genome of the N67 parasite has been assembled recently, but not that of N67C. This study used PacBio HiFi sequencing data to assemble the N67C genome, compared the two genomes, and performed RNA sequencing to identify polymorphisms and differentially expressed genes (DEGs).ResultsThe assembled N67C parasite genome consisted of 16 scaffolds and three contigs of approximately 22.5 Mb with 100% and 96.6% completeness based on well-characterized single-copy orthologs specific to the Apicomplexa phylum and the Plasmodium genus, respectively. A comparison between the annotated N67C and N67 genomes revealed 133 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 75 indels. Among the polymorphic sites, an S (N67) to N (N67C) amino acid substitution at position 114 (S114N) in the dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase (DHFR-TS) confers resistance to pyrimethamine in mice. Additionally, 60 differentially expressed single-copy genes (DEGs) were detected after comparing mRNA levels between the two parasites. Starting with the predicted and annotated 5,681 N67C and 5,749 N67 genes, we identified 4,641 orthogroups that included at least one gene from the four P. yoelii parasites (N67, N67C, 17X, and YM), whereas 758 orthogroups showed subspecies or strain-specific patterns.ConclusionThe identification of polymorphic sites between the N67 and N67C genomes, along with the detection of the DEGs, may provide crucial insights into the variations in parasite drug responses and disease severity between these two isogenic parasites. The functional characterization of these genetic differences and candidate genes will deepen our understanding of disease mechanisms and pave the way for developing more effective control measures against malaria.
BackgroundAchieving precise cancer subtype classification is imperative for effective prognosis and treatment. Multi-omics studies, encompassing diverse data modalities, have emerged as powerful tools for unraveling the complexities of cancer. However, owing to the intricacies of biological data, multi-omics datasets generally show variations in data types, scales, and distributions. These intractable problems lead to challenges in exploring intact representations from heterogeneous data, which often result in inaccuracies in multi-omics information analysis.ResultsTo address the challenges of multi-omics research, our approach DeepMoIC presents a novel framework derived from deep Graph Convolutional Network (GCN). Leveraging autoencoder modules, DeepMoIC extracts compact representations from omics data and incorporates a patient similarity network through the similarity network fusion algorithm. To handle non-Euclidean data and explore high-order omics information effectively, we design a Deep GCN module with two strategies: residual connection and identity mapping. With extracted higher-order representations, our approach consistently outperforms state-of-the-art models on a pan-cancer dataset and 3 cancer subtype datasets.ConclusionThe introduction of Deep GCN shows encouraging performance in terms of supervised multi-omics feature learning, offering promising insights for precision medicine in cancer research. DeepMoIC can potentially be an important tool in the field of cancer subtype classification because of its capacity to handle complex multi-omics data and produce reliable classification findings.
Transcription Factors (TFs) are key regulators of how plants grow and develop. Among the diverse TF families, the Glabrous-enhancer binding protein (GeBP) family plays a key role in trichome initiation and leaf development. The specific roles of GeBP TFs in plants remain largely unexplored, although GeBP transcription factors play important roles in plants. This study identified 16 GhGeBP genes in Gossypium hirsutum, ranging from 534 bp (GhGeBP14) to 1560 bp (GhGeBP2). Phylogenetic analysis grouped 16 GhGeBP genes clustered into three subgroups, unevenly distributed across 14 chromosomes. Analysis of the cis-acting elements revealed 408 motifs in the 2 kb upstream regions of the promoters, including stress-responsive, phytohormone-responsive, and light-responsive elements. Tissue-specific expression analysis showed 8 GhGeBP genes were highly expressed across all tissues, while GhGeBP4 and GhGeBP12 were down-regulated under conditions of drought, salt, cold, and heat stress. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified GhGeBP4 was associated with fiber micronaire (FM) and fiber strength (FS), while GhGeBP9 was linked to the node of the first fruiting branch (NFFB) and flowering time (FT). Haplotype analysis revealed that GhGeBP4-HAP2 exhibited higher fiber quality traits, while GhGeBP9-HAP2 was associated with early maturity. The results of this study offer significant insights that are worthy of further investigation into the role of the GhGeBP gene family in G. hirsutum and promising targets for marker-assisted selection strategies in cotton breeding programs, particularly for improving fiber quality and early maturity traits.
BackgroundHeat stress has caused significant impacts on the poultry industry globally. Tianjin-monkey Chicken (TM) is a local naked neck chicken genetic resource in China, characterized by its heat stress resistance due to a low feather coverage.ResultsWe conducted heat stress stimulation tests on TM and a normal feathered chicken (Jingfen No. 6 Layer, JF), and the breast muscle tissues were collected for transcriptome sequencing. A total of 157 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 1435 DEGs were respectively obtained from the comparisons of JFN-vs-JFT and TMN-vs-TMT. GO enrichment analysis found that biological process (BP) terms including phospholipid homeostasis, regulation of aggrephagy, positive regulation of aggrephagy, and negative regulation of lipase activity may be closely related to heat stress resistance in JF chickens. While catabolism-related BP terms were mainly enriched for DEGs of TM, such as catabolic process, protein catabolic process and cellular catabolic process. KEGG pathway analysis showed that the MAPK signaling pathway was enriched both in TM and JF with high connectivity. In addition, some pathways with higher connectivity (Metabolic pathways, FoxO signaling pathway, TGF-beta signaling pathway and AMPK signaling pathway) may be closely associated with resistance to heat stress in JF. In Tianjin-monkey Chicken, we also identified several pathways potentially involved in heat stress regulation, including Ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, Autophagy-animal and Regulation of actin cytoskeleton. Protein-Protein Interaction Networks (PPI) for the 24 co-differentially expressed genes revealed four key genes (Klf9, Asb2, Tmem164 and Arrdc2) associated with heat stress both in JF and TM.ConclusionsOur findings will enrich the research on heat stress resistance in chicken skeletal muscle, while also providing a theoretical basis for the genetic improvement of heat stress resistance in chickens.
Background Angelica sinensis (Danggui), a renowned medicinal orchid, has gained significant recognition for its therapeutic effects in treating a wide range of ailments. Genome information serves as a valuable resource, enabling researchers to gain a deeper understanding of gene function. In recent times, the availability of chromosome-level genomes for A. sinensis has opened up vast opportunities for exploring gene functionality. Integrating multiomics data can allow researchers to unravel the intricate mechanisms underlying gene function in A. sinensis and further enhance our knowledge of its medicinal properties.Results In this study, we utilized genomic and transcriptomic data to construct a coexpression network for A. sinensis. To annotate genes, we aligned them with sequences from various databases, such as the NR, TAIR, trEMBL, UniProt, and SwissProt databases. For GO and KEGG annotations, we employed InterProScan and GhostKOALA software. Additionally, gene families were predicted using iTAK, HMMER, OrholoFinder, and KEGG annotation. To facilitate gene functional analysis in A. sinensis, we developed a comprehensive platform that integrates genomic and transcriptomic data with processed functional annotations. The platform includes several tools, such as BLAST, GSEA, Heatmap, JBrowse, and Sequence Extraction. This integrated resource and approach will enable researchers to explore the functional aspects of genes in A. sinensis more effectively.Conclusion We developed a platform, named ASAP, to facilitate gene functional analysis in A. sinensis. ASAP (www.gzybioinformatics.cn/ASAP) offers a comprehensive collection of genome data, transcriptome resources, and analysis tools. This platform serves as a valuable resource for researchers conducting gene functional research in their projects, providing them with the necessary data and tools to enhance their studies.
BackgroundPigmented potatoes (Solanum tuberosum L.) are rich in anthocyanin, which have antioxidantiy and play an important role in health and medical. Nevertheless, the regulation mechanism of anthocyanins in purple potato at different growth stages remain unclear.ResultsIn this study, through using the high-throughput sequencing and systematic bioinformatics analysis, a total of 7,176 significantly different expressed genes (DEGs) were discovered from the purple potato Huasong 66 tubers at different developmental stages. Through GO and KEGG enrichment analysis, it was found that, 43 DEGs were mainly enriched in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, flavonoid biosynthesis, and phenylalanine metabolism, which biological processes are closely related to anthocyanin biosynthesis. The quantitative RT-PCR were verified the reliability of transcriptome data. We demonstrated that DEGs or transcription factors (TFs) which related to flavonoid metabolism were involved in the anthocyanins biosynthesis, such as the protein-coding genes PAL, CHS, CHI, 4CL, F3H, UFGT, LAR, and the TFs MYB, bHLH, and HY5.ConclusionThe key genes involved in anthocyanin synthesis in potato tubers were identificated, it provides new insights for molecular breeding new cultivars. These results are valuable for improving the anthocyanin in potato.
The WD40 domain is one of the most abundant domains and is among the top interacting domains in eukaryotic genomes. The WD40 domain of ATG16L1 is essential for LC3 recruitment to endolysosomal membranes during non-canonical autophagy, but dispensable for canonical autophagy. Canonical autophagy was utilized by FMDV, while the relationship between FMDV and non-canonical autophagy is still elusive. In the present study, WD40 knockout (KO) PK15 cells were successfully generated via CRISPR/cas9 technology as a tool for studying the effect of non-canonical autophagy on FMDV replication. The results of growth curve analysis, morphological observation and karyotype analysis showed that the WD40 knockout cell line was stable in terms of growth and morphological characteristics. After infection with FMDV, the expression of viral protein, viral titers, and the number of copies of viral RNA in the WD40-KO cells were significantly greater than those in the wild-type PK15 cells. Moreover, RNA-seq technology was used to sequence WD40-KO cells and wild-type cells infected or uninfected with FMDV. Differentially expressed factors such as Mx1, RSAD2, IFIT1, IRF9, IFITM3, GBP1, CXCL8, CCL5, TNFRSF17 were significantly enriched in the autophagy, NOD-like receptor signaling pathway, RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathway, Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and TNF signaling pathway, etc. The expression levels of differentially expressed genes were detected via qRT-PCR, which was consistent with the RNA-seq data. Here, we experimentally demonstrate for the first time that knockout of the WD40 domain of ATG16L1 enhances FMDV replication by downregulation innate immune factors. In addition, this result also indicates non-canonical autophagy inhibits FMDV replication. In total, our results play an essential role in regulating the replication level of FMDV and providing new insights into virus-host interactions and potential antiviral strategies.
Background Aging is a complex, heterogeneous process that has multiple causes. Knowledge on genomic, epigenomic and transcriptomic changes during the aging process shed light on understanding the aging mechanism. A recent breakthrough in biotechnology, single cell RNAseq, is revolutionizing aging study by providing gene expression profile of the entire transcriptome of individual cells. Many interesting information could be inferred from this new type of data with the help of novel computational methods. Results In this manuscript a novel statistical method, penalized Latent Dirichlet Allocation (pLDA), is applied to an aging mouse blood scRNA-seq data set. A pipeline is built for cell type and aging prediction. The sequence of models in the pipeline take scRNA-seq expression counts as input, preprocess the data using pLDA and predict the cell type and aging status. Conclusions pLDA learns a dimension reduced representation of the expression profile. This representation allows identification of cell types and has predictability of the age of cells.
BackgroundAtrial fibrillation (AF) is a prevalent arrhythmic condition resulting in increased stroke risk and is associated with high mortality. Electrolyte imbalance can increase the risk of AF, where the relationship between AF and serum electrolytes remains unclear.MethodsA total of 15,792 individuals were included in the observational study, with incident AF ascertainment in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. The Cox regression models were applied to calculate the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for AF based on different serum electrolyte levels. Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses were performed to examine the causal association.ResultsIn observational study, after a median 19.7 years of follow-up, a total of 2551 developed AF. After full adjustment, participants with serum potassium below the 5th percentile had a higher risk of AF relative to participants in the middle quintile. Serum magnesium was also inversely associated with the risk of AF. An increased incidence of AF was identified in individuals with higher serum phosphate percentiles. Serum calcium levels were not related to AF risk. Moreover, MR analysis indicated that genetically predicted serum electrolyte levels were not causally associated with AF risk. The odds ratio for AF were 0.999 for potassium, 1.044 for magnesium, 0.728 for phosphate, and 0.979 for calcium, respectively.ConclusionsSerum electrolyte disorders such as hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia and hyperphosphatemia were associated with an increased risk of AF and may also serve to be prognostic factors. However, the present study did not support serum electrolytes as causal mediators for AF development.
The quality of Recombination signal sequences (RSSs), location, and genetics of mammalian V, D, and J genes synergistically affect the recombination frequency of genes; however, the specific regulatory mechanism and efficiency have not been elucidated. By taking advantage of single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) and high-throughput sequencing (HTS) to investigate V(D)J rearrangement characteristics in the CDR3 repertoire, we found that the distal and proximal V genes (or J genes) "to D" gene were involved in rearrangement significantly more frequently than the middle V genes (or J genes) in the TRB locus among various species, including Primates (human and rhesus monkey), Rodentia (BALB/c, C57BL/6, and Kunming mice), Artiodactyla (buffalo), and Chiroptera (Rhinolophus affinis). The RSS quality of the V and J genes affected their frequency in rearrangement to varying degrees, especially when the V-RSSs with recombination signal information content (RIC) score < -45 significantly reduced the recombination frequency of the V gene. The V and J genes that were "away from D" had the dual advantages of recombinant structural accessibility and relatively high-quality RSSs, which promoted their preferential utilization in rearrangement. The quality of J-RSSs formed during mammalian evolution was apparently greater than that of V-RSSs, and the D-J distance was obviously shorter than that of V-D, which may be one of the reasons for guaranteeing that the "D-to-J preceding V-to-DJ rule" occurred when rearranged. This study provides a novel perspective on the mechanism and efficiency of V-D-J rearrangement in the mammalian TRB locus, as well as the biased utilization characteristics and application of V and J genes in the initial CDR3 repertoire.
Background Gene expression pattern is associated with biological phenotype and is widely used in exploring gene functions. Its evolution is also crucial in understanding species speciation and divergence. The genus Gossypium is a bona fide model for studying plant evolution and polyploidization. However, the evolution of gene expression during cotton species divergence has yet to be extensively discussed. Results Based on the seedling leaf transcriptomes, this work analyzed the transcriptomic content and expression patterns across eight cotton species, including six diploids and two natural tetraploids. Our findings indicate that, while the biological function of these cotton transcriptomes remains largely conserved, there has been significant variation in transcriptomic content during species divergence. Furthermore, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of expression distances across cotton species. This analysis lends further support to the use of G. arboreum as a substitute for the A-genome donor of natural cotton polyploids. Moreover, our research highlights the evolution of stress-responsive pathways, including hormone signaling, fatty acid degradation, and flavonoid biosynthesis. These processes appear to have evolved under lower selection pressures, presumably reflecting their critical role in the adaptations of the studied cotton species to diverse environments. Conclusions In summary, this study provided insights into the gene expression variation within the genus Gossypium and identified essential genes/pathways whose expression evolution was closely associated with the evolution of cotton species. Furthermore, the method of characterizing genes and pathways under unexpected high or slow selection pressure can also serve as a new strategy for gene function exploration.
Background Tumor cells exhibit a heightened susceptibility to lysosomal-dependent cell death (LCD) compared to normal cells. However, the role of LCD-related genes (LCD-RGs) in Osteosarcoma (OS) remains unelucidated. This study aimed to elucidate the role of LCD-RGs and their mechanisms in OS using several existing OS related datasets, including TCGA-OS, GSE16088, GSE14359, GSE21257 and GSE162454.Results Analysis identified a total of 8,629 DEGs1, 2,777 DEGs2 and 21 intersection genes. Importantly, two biomarkers (ATP6V0D1 and HDAC6) linked to OS prognosis were identified to establish the prognostic model. Significant differences in risk scores for OS survival were observed between high and low-risk cohorts. Additionally, scores of dendritic cells (DC), immature DCs and gamma delta T cells differed significantly between the two risk cohorts. Cell annotations from GSE162454 encompassed eight types (myeloid cells, osteoblastic OS cells and plasma cells). ATP6V0D1 was found to be significantly over-expressed in myeloid cells and osteoclasts, while HDAC6 was under-expressed across all cell types. Moreover, single-cell trajectory mapping revealed that myeloid cells and osteoclasts differentiated first, underscoring their pivotal role in patients with OS. Furthermore, ATP6V0D1 expression progressively decreased with time.Conclusions A new prognostic model for OS, associated with LCD-RGs, was developed and validated, offering a fresh perspective for exploring the association between LCD and OS.
BackgroundNonspecific orbital inflammation (NSOI) is an idiopathic, persistent, and proliferative inflammatory condition affecting the orbit, characterized by polymorphous lymphoid infiltration. Its pathogenesis and progression have been linked to imbalances in tumor metabolic pathways, with glutamine (Gln) metabolism emerging as a critical aspect in cancer. Metabolic reprogramming is known to influence clinical outcomes in various malignancies. However, comprehensive research on glutamine metabolism's significance in NSOI is lacking.MethodsThis study conducted a bioinformatics analysis to identify and validate potential glutamine-related molecules (GlnMgs) associated with NSOI. The discovery of GlnMgs involved the intersection of differential expression analysis with a set of 42 candidate GlnMgs. The biological functions and pathways of the identified GlnMgs were analyzed using GSEA and GSVA. Lasso regression and SVM-RFE methods identified hub genes and assessed the diagnostic efficacy of fourteen GlnMgs in NSOI. The correlation between hub GlnMgs and clinical characteristics was also examined. The expression levels of the fourteen GlnMgs were validated using datasets GSE58331 and GSE105149.ResultsFourteen GlnMgs related to NSOI were identified, including FTCD, CPS1, CTPS1, NAGS, DDAH2, PHGDH, GGT1, GCLM, GLUD1, ART4, AADAT, ASNSD1, SLC38A1, and GFPT2. Biological function analysis indicated their involvement in responses to extracellular stimulus, mitochondrial matrix, and lipid transport. The diagnostic performance of these GlnMgs in distinguishing NSOI showed promising results.ConclusionsThis study successfully identified fourteen GlnMgs associated with NSOI, providing insights into potential novel biomarkers for NSOI and avenues for monitoring disease progression.
Background Diachasmimorpha longicaudata is a hymenopteran fruit fly endoparasitoid. Females of this species find their hosts for oviposition by using complex sensorial mechanisms in response to physical and chemical stimuli associated with the host and host habitat. Ecological and behavioral aspects related to host-seeking behavior for oviposition have been extensively studied in D. longicaudata, including the identification of volatile organic compounds acting as attractants to females. In this sense, molecular mechanisms of chemoreception have been explored in this species, including a preliminary characterization of odorant-binding proteins (OBPs), chemosensory proteins (CSPs) and odorant receptors (ORs), among other proteins. Functional assays on OBP and CSP have been conducted as a first approach to identify molecular mechanisms associated with the female host-seeking behavior for oviposition. The aims of the present study were to identify the D. longicaudata sensory gene repertoire expressed in the antenna of sexually mature and mated individuals of both sexes, and subsequently, characterize transcripts differentially expressed in the antennae of females to identify candidate genes associated with the female host-seeking behavior for oviposition. Results A total of 33,745 predicted protein-coding sequences were obtained from a de novo antennal transcriptome assembly. Ten sensory-related gene families were annotated as follows: 222 ORs, 44 ionotropic receptors (IRs), 25 gustatory receptors (GRs), 9 CSPs, 13 OBPs, 2 ammonium transporters (AMTs), 8 pickpocket (PPKs) receptors, 16 transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, 12 CD36/SNMPs and 3 Niemann-Pick type C2 like proteins (NPC2-like). The differential expression analysis revealed 237 and 151 transcripts up- and downregulated, respectively, between the female and male antennae. Ninety-seven differentially expressed transcripts corresponded to sensory-related genes including 88 transcripts being upregulated (87 ORs and one TRP) and nine downregulated (six ORs, two CSPs and one OBP) in females compared to males. Conclusions The sensory gene repertoire of D. longicaudata was similar to that of other taxonomically related parasitoid wasps. We identified a high number of ORs upregulated in the female antenna. These results may indicate that this gene family has a central role in the chemoreception of sexually mature females during the search for hosts and host habitats for reproductive purposes.
CircRNAs are a type of circular non-coding RNA whose associations with drug sensitivities have been demonstrated in recent studies. Due to the high cost of biomedical experiments for detecting the associations between circRNAs and drug sensitivities, several computational methods have been developed. However, these methods were evaluated mainly based on 5- or tenfold cross-validation, which are often over-optimistic. Furthermore, there are technique issues with these models, such as over-smoothing and over-squashing. To address these issues, we propose a strategy to evaluate models based on independent test sets for association prediction-related studies. In the light of this effective assessment, we constructed a model, SGTCDA, by integrating structural deep network embedding (SDNE) and a graph transformer to predict the potential associations of circRNA-drug sensitivity, which can efficiently capture long-range dependencies and local structural information of nodes. Our results on the training sets and the independent test sets indicate that SGTCDA outperforms the other state-of-the-art models, demonstrating its capacity for accurate prediction of circRNA-drug sensitivity. Moreover, we leveraged EdgeSHAPer to explain the performance of the proposed SGTCDA model, which illustrates that the edges between drugs are more important than other edges for the performance of the model. The source code and dataset of SGTCDA are available at: https://github.com/hwxia/SGTCDA.
Background Setae on the pad lamellae of the Japanese gecko Gekko japonicus (Schlegel, 1836), a vital epidermal derivative, are primarily composed of cornified beta-proteins (CBPs) and play a pivotal role in adhesion and climbing. The amino acid composition of CBPs might be a determining factor influencing their functional properties. However, the molecular mechanisms governed by CBP genes with diverse amino acid compositions in setae development remain unexplored. Results Based on RNA-seq analyses, this study confirmed that all G. japonicus CBPs (GjCBPs) are involved in setae formation. Cysteine-rich CBPs encoding genes (ge-cprp-17 to ge-cprp-26) and glycine-rich CBPs encoding genes (ge-gprp-17 to ge-gprp-22) were haphazardly selected, with quantitative real-time PCR revealing their expression patterns in embryonic pad lamellae and dorsal epidermis. It is inferred that glycine-rich CBPs are integral to the formation of both dorsal scales and lamellar setae, cysteine-rich CBPs are primarily associated with setae development. Additionally, fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed spatiotemporal differences in the expression of a glycine-rich CBP encoding gene (ge-gprp-19) and a cysteine-rich CBP encoding gene (ge-cprp-17) during dorsal scales and/or lamellar development. Conclusions All 66 CBPs are involved in the formation of setae. Glycine-rich CBPs hold a significant role in the development of dorsal scales and lamellar setae, whereas most cysteine-rich CBPs appear to be essential components of G. japonicus setae. Even GjCBPs with similar amino acid compositions may play diverse functions. The clear spatio-temporal expression differences between the glycine-rich and cysteine-rich CBP encoding genes during epidermal scale and/or setae formation were observed. Embryonic developmental stages 39 to 42 emerged as crucial phases for setae development. These findings lay the groundwork for deeper investigation into the function of GjCBPs in the development of G. japonicus setae.
BackgroundTea is an important cash crop that significantly contributes to rural development, poverty reduction and food security in many developing countries. It provides livelihoods for millions of smallholder producers and aids their economic stability. Anthocyanins in tea leaves provides excellent commercial quality and germplasm exploration potential. These compounds give tea leaves vibrant colors and increase health benefits. The current understanding of the synergistic regulation mechanisms responsible for color changes in purple tea, attributed to anthocyanin degradation, remains unclear.ResultsIn this study, we have identified 30 gene families within the genome that are associated to with anthocyanin metabolism from tea. These gene families play distinct roles in the biosynthesis of anthocyanin including the formation of the core, structure, modification of the molecular framework, facilitation of transport process, regulation of gene expression, breakdown pathways, sugar transportation and iron ion respectively. Subsequently, we investigated the synergistic mechanisms of anthocyanin metabolism related gene families within tea leaves using structural equation modeling. The results showed that sugar transport positively affects anthocyanin transportation, and promotes anthocyanin degradation during leaf pigmentation, whereas, it inhibits anthocyanin degradation during the fading of leaf color. Further, Iron ions facilitate the degradation of anthocyanins during their deposition and conversely, impede this degradation process during digestion. These finding suggests that tea plants may regulate the synthesis and degradation of anthocyanins through sugar transport and iron ions ensure healthy levels and vibrant colors.ConclusionsOur study contributes valuable information into the dynamic equilibrium anthocyanin mechanism and sheds light on complex regulatory mechanisms that govern the synthesis, transport and degradation of these pigments. These insights could be further used to develop strategies for enhancing anthocyanins content in unique tea germplasm to aid tea industry in producing new tea products with increased health benefits and aesthetic appeals.
The common pochard (Aythya ferina) is a freshwater diving duck found in the Palearctic region that has been classified as vulnerable by the IUCN due to continuous and rapid population declines across their distribution. To gain a better understanding of its genetic mechanism of adaptive evolution, we successfully sequenced and assembled the first high-quality chromosome-level genome of A. ferina using Illumina, Nanopore and Hi-C sequencing technologies. A total assembly length of 1,130.78 Mbp was obtained, with over 98.81% (1,117.37Mbp) of sequence anchored to 35 pseudo-chromosomes. We predicted 17,232 protein-coding genes, 95.9% of which were functionally annotated. We identified 339 expanded and 937 contracted gene families in the genome of A. ferina, and detected 95 genes that have been positively selected. The significantly enriched Gene Ontology and enriched pathways were related to energy metabolism, immune, nervous, and sensory systems, suggests that these factors likely played an important role in its evolution. Importantly, we recovered signatures of positive selection on genes related to vasoconstriction that may be associated with thermoregulatory adaptations of A. ferina for underwater diving. Overall, the high-quality genome assembly and annotation in this study provides valuable genomic resources for ecological and evolutionary studies, as well as toward the conservation of A. ferina.
BackgroundMicrosatellites are increasingly realized to have biological significance in human genome and health in past decades, the assembled complete reference sequence of human genome T2T-CHM13 brought great help for a comprehensive study of short tandem repeats in the human genome.ResultsMicrosatellites density landscapes of all 24 chromosomes were built here for the first complete reference sequence of human genome T2T-CHM13. These landscapes showed that short tandem repeats (STRs) are prone to aggregate characteristically to form a large number of STRs density peaks. We classified 8,823 High Microsatellites Density Peaks (HMDPs), 35,257 Middle Microsatellites Density Peaks (MMDPs) and 199, 649 Low Microsatellites Density Peaks (LMDPs) on the 24 chromosomes; and also classified the motif types of every microsatellites density peak. These STRs density aggregation peaks are mainly composing of a single motif, and AT is the most dominant motif, followed by AATGG and CCATT motifs. And 514 genomic regions were characterized by microsatellite density feature in the full T2T-CHM13 genome.ConclusionsThese landscape maps exhibited that microsatellites aggregate in many genomic positions to form a large number of microsatellite density peaks with composing of mainly single motif type in the complete reference genome, indicating that the local microsatellites density varies enormously along the every chromosome of T2T-CHM13.
Drought stress can significantly affect plant growth, development, and yield. Fewer comparative studies have been conducted between different species of pines, particularly involving Pinus yunnanensis var. pygmaea (P. pygmaea). In this study, the physiological indices, photosynthetic pigment and related antioxidant enzyme changes in needles from P. pygmaea, P. elliottii and P. massoniana under drought at 0, 7, 14, 21, 28 and 35 d, as well as 7 days after rehydration, were measured. The PacBio single-molecule real-time (SMRT) and Illumina RNA sequencing were used to uncover the gene expression differences in P. pygmaea under drought and rehydration conditions. The results showed that the total antioxidant capacity (TAOC) of P. pygmaea was significantly higher than P. massoniana and P. elliottii. TAOC showed a continuous increase trend across all species. Soluble sugar (SS), starch content and non-structural carbohydrate (NSC) of all three pines displayed a "W" pattern, declining initially, increasing, and then decreasing again. P. pygmaea exhibits stronger drought tolerance and greater recovery ability under prolonged drought conditions. Through the PacBio SMRT-seq, a total of 50,979 high-quality transcripts were generated, and 6,521 SSR and 5,561 long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) were identified. A total of 2310, 1849, 5271, 5947, 7710, and 6854 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified compared to the control (Pp0D) in six pair-wise comparisons of treatment versus control. bHLH, NAC, ERF, MYB_related, C3H transcription factors (TFs) play an important role in drought tolerance of P. pygmaea. KEGG enrichment analysis and Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) analysis showed that P. pygmaea may respond to drought by enhancing metabolic processes such as ABA signaling pathway, alpha-linolenic acid. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) revealed GST, CAT, LEC14B, SEC23 were associated with antioxidant enzyme activity and TAOC. This study provides a basis for further research on drought tolerance differences among coniferous species.
Background Dendrobium huoshanense, a traditional medicinal and food plant, has a rich history of use. Recently, its genome was decoded, offering valuable insights into gene function. However, there is no comprehensive gene functional analysis platform for D. huoshanense. Result To address this, we created a platform for gene function analysis and comparison in D. huoshanense (DhuFAP). Using 69 RNA-seq samples, we constructed a gene co-expression network and annotated D. huoshanense genes by aligning sequences with public protein databases. Our platform contained tools like Blast, gene set enrichment analysis, heatmap analysis, sequence extraction, and JBrowse. Analysis revealed co-expression of transcription factors (C2H2, GRAS, NAC) with genes encoding key enzymes in alkaloid biosynthesis. We also showcased the reliability and applicability of our platform using Chalcone synthases (CHS). Conclusion DhuFAP (www.gzybioinformatics.cn/DhuFAP) and its suite of tools represent an accessible and invaluable resource for researchers, enabling the exploration of functional information pertaining to D. huoshanense genes. This platform stands poised to facilitate significant biological discoveries in this domain.
BackgroundAlzheimer's disease (AD) is a complicated neurodegenerative disease. Neuron-glial cell interactions are an important but not fully understood process in the progression of AD. We used bioinformatic methods to analyze single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) data to investigate the cellular and molecular biological processes of AD.MethodsnRNA-seq data were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets and reprocessed to identify 240,804 single nuclei from healthy controls and patients with AD. The cellular composition of AD was further explored using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP). Enrichment analysis for the functions of the DEGs was conducted and cell development trajectory analyses were used to reveal underlying cell fate decisions. iTALK was performed to identify ligand-receptor pairs among various cell types in the pathological ecological microenvironment of AD.ResultsSix cell types and multiple subclusters were identified based on the snRNA-seq data. A subcluster of neuron and glial cells co-expressing lncRNA-SNHG14, myocardin-related transcription factor A (MRTFA), and MRTFB was found to be more abundant in the AD group. This subcluster was enriched in mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-, immune-, and apoptosis-related pathways. Through molecular docking, we found that lncRNA-SNHG14 may bind MRTFA and MRTFB, resulting in an interaction between neurons and glial cells.ConclusionsThe findings of this study describe a regulatory relationship between lncRNA-SNHG14, MRTFA, and MRTFB in the six main cell types of AD. This relationship may contribute to microenvironment remodeling in AD and provide a theoretical basis for a more in-depth analysis of AD.
Copy-number variations (CNVs), which refer to deletions and duplications of chromosomal segments, represent a significant source of variation among individuals, contributing to human evolution and being implicated in various diseases ranging from mental illness and developmental disorders to cancer. Despite the development of several methods for detecting copy number variations based on next-generation sequencing (NGS) data, achieving robust detection performance for CNVs with arbitrary coverage and amplitude remains challenging due to the inherent complexity of sequencing samples. In this paper, we propose an alternative method called OTSUCNV for CNV detection on whole genome sequencing (WGS) data. This method utilizes a newly designed adaptive sequence segmentation algorithm and an OTSU-based CNV prediction algorithm, which does not rely on any distribution assumptions or involve complex outlier factor calculations. As a result, the effective detection of CNVs is achieved with lower computational complexity. The experimental results indicate that the proposed method demonstrates outstanding performance, and hence it may be used as an effective tool for CNV detection.
Background MYB transcription factors regulate anthocyanin biosynthesis across numerous plant species. However, comprehensive genome-wide investigations regarding the R2R3-MYB gene family and its involvement in regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis in the red and white fruit color morphs of Fragaria pentaphylla remain scarce. Results A total of 101 FpR2R3-MYB genes were identified from the F. pentaphylla genome and were divided into 34 subgroups based on phylogenetic analysis. Gene structure (exon/intron) and protein motifs were particularly conserved among the FpR2R3-MYB genes, especially members within the same subgroup. The FpR2R3-MYB genes were distributed over seven F. pentaphylla chromosomes. Analysis of gene duplication events revealed five pairs of tandem duplication genes and 16 pairs of segmental duplication genes, suggesting that segmental duplications are the major pattern for expansion of the FpR2R3-MYB gene family expansion in F. pentaphylla. Cis-regulatory elements of the FpR2R3-MYB promoters were involved in cellular development, phytohormones, environmental stress and photoresponse. Based on the analysis of the FpR2R3-MYB gene family and transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) data, FpMYB9 was identified as a key transcription factor involved in the regulation of anthocyanin synthesis in F. pentaphylla fruits. The expression of FpMYB9 increases significantly during the ripening stage of red fruits, as confirmed by reverse transcription quantitative real-time PCR. In addition, subcellular localization experiments further confirmed the nuclear presence of FpMYB9, supporting its role as a transcription factor involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis. Conclusion Our results showed that the FpR2R3-MYB genes are highly conserved and play important roles in the anthocyanin biosynthesis in F. pentaphylla fruits. Our results also provide a compelling basis for further understanding of the regulatory mechanism underlying the role of FpMYB9 in anthocyanin formation in F. pentaphylla fruits.
Background Fritillaria ussuriensis is an endangered medicinal plant known for its notable therapeutic properties. Unfortunately, its population has drastically declined due to the destruction of forest habitats. Thus, effectively protecting F. ussuriensis from extinction poses a significant challenge. A profound understanding of its genetic foundation is crucial. To date, research on the complete mitochondrial genome of F. ussuriensis has not yet been reported. Results The complete mitochondrial genome of F. ussuriensis was sequenced and assembled by integrating PacBio and Illumina sequencing technologies, revealing 13 circular chromosomes totaling 737,569 bp with an average GC content of 45.41%. A total of 55 genes were annotated in this mitogenome, including 2 rRNA genes, 12 tRNA genes, and 41 PCGs. The mitochondrial genome of F. ussuriensis contained 192 SSRs and 4,027 dispersed repeats. In the PCGs of F. ussuriensis mitogenome, 90.00% of the RSCU values exceeding 1 exhibited a preference for A-ended or U-ended codons. In addition, 505 RNA editing sites were predicted across these PCGs. Selective pressure analysis suggested negative selection on most PCGs to preserve mitochondrial functionality, as the notable exception of the gene nad3 showed positive selection. Comparison between the mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of F. ussuriensis revealed 20 homologous fragments totaling 8,954 bp. Nucleotide diversity analysis revealed the variation among genes, and gene atp9 was the most notable. Despite the conservation of GC content, mitogenome sizes varied significantly among six closely related species, and colinear analysis confirmed the lack of conservation in their genomic structures. Phylogenetic analysis indicated a close relationship between F. ussuriensis and Lilium tsingtauense. Conclusions In this study, we sequenced and annotated the mitogenome of F. ussuriensis and compared it with the mitogenomes of other closely related species. In addition to genomic features and evolutionary position, this study also provides valuable genomic resources to further understand and utilize this medicinal plant.
Cyathus olla, belonging to the genus Cyathus within the order Agaricales, is renowned for its bird's nest-like fruiting bodies and has been utilized in folk medicine. However, its genome remains poorly understood. To investigate genomic diversity within the genus Cyathus and elucidate biosynthetic pathways for medicinal compounds, we generated a high-quality genome assembly of C. olla with fourteen chromosomes. The comparative genome analysis revealed variations in both genomes and specific functional genes within the genus Cyathus. Phylogenomic and gene family variation analyses provided insights into evolutionary divergence, as well as genome expansion and contraction in individual Cyathus species and 36 typical Basidiomycota. Furthermore, analysis of LTR-RT and Ka/Ks revealed apparent whole-genome duplication (WGD) events its genome. Through genome mining and metabolite profiling, we identified the biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) for cyathane diterpenes from C. olla. Furthermore, we predicted 32 BGCs, containing 41 core genes, involved in other bioactive metabolites. These findings represent a valuable genomic resource that will enhance our understanding of Cyathus species genetic diversity. The genome analysis of C. olla provides insights into the biosynthesis of medicinal compounds and establishes a fundamental basis for future investigations into the genetic basis of chemodiversity in this significant medicinal fungus.
BackgroundMyocardial infarction (MI) induces complex transcriptional changes across diverse cardiac cell types. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) provides an unparalleled ability to discern cellular diversity during infarction, yet the veracity of these discoveries necessitates confirmation. This investigation sought to elucidate MI mechanisms by integrating scRNA-seq and bulk RNA-seq data.MethodsPublicly available scRNA-seq (GSE136088) and bulk RNA-seq (GSE153485) data from mice MI models were analyzed. Cell types were annotated, and differential expression analysis conducted. Bulk RNA-seq underwent quality control, principal component analysis, and differential expression analysis.ResultsIn scRNA-seq data, the comparison between MI and sham groups unveiled a reduction in endothelial cell populations, but macrophages and monocytes increased. Within fibroblast subgroups, three distinct categories were discerned, with two exhibiting upregulation in MI. Notably, endothelial cells exhibited an elevated expression of genes associated with apoptosis and ferroptosis. In bulk RNA-seq analysis, distinct patterns emerged when comparing MI and sham groups. Specifically, six genes linked to endothelial ferroptosis exhibited heightened expression in MI group, thereby corroborating the scRNA-seq findings. Moreover, the examination of isolated cardiac macrophages from mice MI model revealed increased expression of Spp1, Col1a2, Col3a1, Ctsd, and Lgals3 compared to sham group, thus substantiating the dysregulation of macrophage apoptosis-related proteins following MI.ConclusionMI altered the transcriptomic landscapes of cardiac cells with increased expression of apoptotic genes. Moreover, the upregulation of macrophage apoptosis marker was confirmed within MI models. The presence of endothelial cell depletion and ferroptosis in MI has been demonstrated.
Pine wilt disease (PWD) is a devastating disease of pine trees caused by the pine wood nematode (Bursapherenchus xylophilus, PWN). To study how Pinus tabulaeformis responds to PWD infection, we collected 3-year-old P. tabulaeformis seedlings at 2 days, 5 days, and 8 days after being infected with B. xylophilus. We identified genes and metabolites early responding to infection using transcriptome and metabolomic data obtained by high-throughput mRNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based assays, respectively. The following results were obtained: (1) After inoculation with PWN, the average number of days taken for 3-year-old P. tabulaeformis seedlings to develop symptoms was 8 days. (2) Combined transcriptome and metabolome analysis revealed that phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and flavonoid biosynthesis are critically important pathways for P. tabulaeformis to respond to PWD. (3) The response of P. tabulaeformis to stress was mainly through positive regulation of gene expression, including some key genes related to plant hormones or transcription factors that have been widely studied. Genes related to pathways such as photosynthesis, plant-pathogen interactions, and DNA replication were downregulated. (4) Terpenoid biosynthesis genes involved during the development of pine wilt disease. This study demonstrated the defence and pathogenic mechanisms of P. tabulaeformis against PWD, providing a reference for the early diagnosis of PWD.
BackgroundPoplar anthracnose, which is one of the most important tree diseases, is primarily caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, which has been detected in poplar plantations in China and is responsible for serious economic losses. The characteristics of 84K poplar that have made it one of the typical woody model plants used for investigating stress resistance include its rapid growth, simple reproduction, and adaptability.ResultsIn this study, we found that the resistance of 84K poplar to anthracnose varied considerably depending on how the samples were inoculated of the two seedlings in each tissue culture bottle, one (84K-Cg) was inoculated for 6 days, whereas the 84K-DCg samples were another seedling inoculated at the 6th day and incubated for another 6 days under the same conditions. It was showed that the average anthracnose spot diameter on 84K-Cg and 84K-DCg leaves was 1.23 +/- 0.0577 cm and 0.67 +/- 0.1154 cm, respectively. Based on the transcriptome sequencing analysis, it was indicated that the upregulated phenylpropanoid biosynthesis-related genes in 84K poplar infected with C. gloeosporioides, including genes encoding PAL, C4H, 4CL, HCT, CCR, COMT, F5H, and CAD, are also involved in other KEGG pathways (i.e., flavonoid biosynthesis and phenylalanine metabolism). The expression levels of these genes were lowest in 84K-Cg and highest in 84K-DCg.ConclusionsIt was found that PAL-related genes may be crucial for the induced resistance of 84K poplar to anthracnose, which enriched in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. These results will provide the basis for future research conducted to verify the contribution of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis to induced resistance and explore plant immune resistance-related signals that may regulate plant defense capabilities, which may provide valuable insights relevant to the development of effective and environmentally friendly methods for controlling poplar anthracnose.
Background Zingiber officinale Roscoe, colloquially known as ginger, is a crop of significant medicinal and culinary value that frequently encounters adversity stemming from inhospitable environmental conditions. The MYB transcription factors have garnered recognition for their pivotal role in orchestrating a multitude of plant biological pathways. Nevertheless, the enumeration and characterization of the MYBs within Z. officinale Roscoe remains unknown. This study embarks on a genome-wide scrutiny of the MYB gene lineage in ginger, with the aim of cataloging all ZoMYB genes implicated in the biosynthesis of gingerols and curcuminoids, and elucidating their potential regulatory mechanisms in counteracting abiotic stress, thereby influencing ginger growth and development. Results In this study, we identified an MYB gene family comprising 231 members in ginger genome. This ensemble comprises 74 singular-repeat MYBs (1R-MYB), 156 double-repeat MYBs (R2R3-MYB), and a solitary triple-repeat MYB (R1R2R3-MYB). Moreover, a comprehensive analysis encompassing the sequence features, conserved protein motifs, phylogenetic relationships, chromosome location, and gene duplication events of the ZoMYBs was conducted. We classified ZoMYBs into 37 groups, congruent with the number of conserved domains and gene structure analysis. Additionally, the expression profiles of ZoMYBs during development and under various stresses, including ABA, cold, drought, heat, and salt, were investigated in ginger utilizing both RNA-seq data and qRT-PCR analysis. Conclusion This work provides a comprehensive understanding of the MYB family in ginger and lays the foundation for the future investigation of the potential functions of ZoMYB genes in ginger growth, development and abiotic stress tolerance of ginger.
Background The skeletal muscle growth rate and body size of Tibetan pigs (TIB) are lower than Large white pigs (LW). However, the underlying genetic basis attributing to these differences remains uncertain. To address this knowledge gap, the present study employed whole-genome sequencing of TIB (slow growth) and LW (fast growth) individuals, and integrated with existing NCBI sequencing datasets of TIB and LW individuals, enabling the identification of a comprehensive set of genetic variations for each breed. The specific and predominant SNPs in the TIB and LW populations were detected by using a cutoff value of 0.50 for SNP allele frequency and absolute allele frequency differences (triangle AF) between the TIB and LW populations.Results A total of 21,767,938 SNPs were retrieved from 44 TIB and 29 LW genomes. The analysis detected 2,893,106 (13.29%) and 813,310 (3.74%) specific and predominant SNPs in the TIB and LW populations, and annotated to 24,560 genes. Further GO analysis revealed 291 genes involved in biological processes related to striated and/or skeletal muscle differentiation, proliferation, hypertrophy, regulation of striated muscle cell differentiation and proliferation, and myoblast differentiation and fusion. These 291 genes included crucial regulators of muscle cell determination, proliferation, differentiation, and hypertrophy, such as members of the Myogenic regulatory factors (MRF) (MYOD, MYF5, MYOG, MYF6) and Myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) (MEF2A, MEF2C, MEF2D) families, as well as muscle growth inhibitors (MSTN, ACVR1, and SMAD1); KEGG pathway analysis revealed 106 and 20 genes were found in muscle growth related positive and negative regulatory signaling pathways. Notably, genes critical for protein synthesis, such as MTOR, IGF1, IGF1R, IRS1, INSR, and RPS6KA6, were implicated in these pathways.Conclusion This study employed an effective methodology to rigorously identify the potential genes associated with skeletal muscle development. A substantial number of SNPs and genes that potentially play roles in the divergence observed in skeletal muscle growth between the TIB and LW breeds were identified. These findings offer valuable insights into the genetic underpinnings of skeletal muscle development and present opportunities for enhancing meat production through pig breeding.
Background In Eukaryotes, inositol polyphosphates (InsPs) represent a large family of secondary messengers and play crucial roes in various cellular processes. InsPs are synthesized through a series of pohophorylation reactions catalyzed by various InsP kinases in a sequential manner. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 3-kinase (IP3 3-kinase/IP3K), one member of InsP kinase, plays important regulation roles in InsPs metabolism by specifically phosphorylating inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) to inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate (IP4) in animal cells. IP3Ks were widespread in fungi, plants and animals. However, its evolutionary history and patterns have not been examined systematically.Results A total of 104 and 31 IP3K orthologues were identified across 57 plant genomes and 13 animal genomes, respectively. Phylogenetic analyses indicate that IP3K originated in the common ancestor before the divergence of fungi, plants and animals. In most plants and animals, IP3K maintained low-copy numbers suggesting functional conservation during plant and animal evolution. In Brassicaceae and vertebrate, IP3K underwent one and two duplication events, respectively, resulting in multiple gene copies. Whole-genome duplication (WGD) was the main mechanism for IP3K duplications, and the IP3K duplicates have experienced functional divergence. Finally, a hypothetical evolutionary model for the IP3K proteins is proposed based on phylogenetic theory.Conclusion Our study reveals the evolutionary history of IP3K proteins and guides the future functions of animal, plant, and fungal IP3K proteins.
Background Green foxtail [Setaria viridis (L.)] is one of the most abundant and troublesome annual grass weeds in alfalfa fields in Northeast China. Synthetic auxin herbicide is widely used in agriculture, while how auxin herbicide affects tillering on perennial grass weeds is still unclear. A greenhouse experiment was conducted to examine the effects of auxin herbicide 2,4-D on green foxtail growth, especially on tillers. Results In the study, 2,4-D isooctyl ester was used. There was an inhibition of plant height and fresh weight on green foxtail after application. The photosynthetic rate of the leaves was dramatically reduced and there was an accumulation of malondialdehyde (MDA) content. Moreover, applying 2,4-D isooctyl ester significantly reduced the tillering buds at rates between 2100 and 8400 ga. i. /ha. Transcriptome results showed that applying 2,4-D isooctyl ester on leaves affected the phytohormone signal transduction pathways in plant tillers. Among them, there were significant effects on auxin, cytokinin, abscisic acid (ABA), gibberellin (GA), and brassinosteroid signaling. Indeed, external ABA and GA on leaves also limited tillering in green foxtail. Conclusions These data will be helpful to further understand the responses of green foxtail to 2, 4-D isooctyl ester, which may provide a unique perspective for the development and identification of new target compounds that are effective against this weed species.
The use of complete organelle genomes, including chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes, is a powerful molecular method for studying biological evolution and gene transfer. However, in the case of Polygonaceae, an important family with numerous edible, medicinal, and ornamental species, the mitochondrial genomes of only three species have been sequenced and analyzed. In this study, we present the mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of two important Tibetan medicinal plants, Bistorta viviparum and B. macrophyllum. All the organelle genomes are assembled into a single circular structure and contain a common set of 32 protein-coding genes (PCGs). Some genes such as rps2 and ndhF were found to have high nucleotide polymorphism (Pi) in the chloroplast genomes, while cox1, mttB and rps12 showed pronounced Pi values in the mitochondrial genomes. Furthermore, our analysis revealed that most chloroplast genes and mitochondrial PCGs in Polygonaceae plants are under purifying selection. However, a few genes, including the chloroplast gene psaJ and the mitochondrial genes ccmFc, atp8 and nad4, showed positive selection in certain Polygonaceae plants, as indicated by a Ka/Ks ratio greater than one. Structural variation analysis revealed a wealth of differences between the mitochondrial genomes of five Polygonaceae species, with a particularly notable large-scale inversion observed between Reynoutria japonica and Fallopia aubertii. Furthermore, an analysis of the homologous sequences in the chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes revealed that the rps7 has been transferred from the chloroplast to the mitochondrial genome in all five Polygonaceae species. Finally, ecological niche models were constructed for B. viviparum and B. macrophyllum, indicating that mean annual temperature and altitude are the main climatic factors influencing the distribution of both species. Although the current distribution of B. viviparum is significantly wider than that of B. macrophyllum, projections suggest that the optimal growth ranges of both species will expand in the future, with B. macrophyllum potentially exceeding B. viviparum. This study not only contributes to the plastid genome database for Polygonaceae plants, but also provides theoretical insights into the adaptive evolution of these plants.
BackgroundThe extract from Metasequoia glyptostroboides Hu et Cheng, a rare and endangered species native to China, exhibits numerous biological and pharmacological activities. The species is recalcitrant to rooting during micropropagation, a challenge that has yet to be resolved. In this study, transcriptomic and hormonal analyses were conducted to appreciate the molecular mechanism of adventitious root (AR) formation in optimized rooting conditions.ResultsThe use of 2/5-strength Woody Plant Medium (WPM) significantly promoted AR formation of M. glyptostroboides shoots while the content of endogenous auxin, cytokinins and gibberellins (GAs) varied at different stages of AR formation. Transcriptomic analysis showed the significant up- or down-regulation of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with plant hormone signal transduction and the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway in response to 2/5-strength WPM. DEGs related to the biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid, cytokinins and GAs were identified. Transcript factors involved in 13 families were also revealed. A weighted gene co-expression network analysis indicated a strong correlation between hormones and genes involved in plant hormone signal transduction and the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway.ConclusionsThese results indicate that the AR-promoting potential of 2/5-strength WPM in M. glyptostroboides was due to complex interactions between hormones and the expression of genes related to plant hormone signal transduction and the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway.
Background Fish scales are typical products of biomineralization and play an important role in the adaptation of fish to their environment. The Gymnocypris przewalskii scales are highly specialized, with scales embedded in only specific parts of the dermis, such as the areas around the anal fin and branchiostegite, making G. przewalskii an ideal material for biomineralization research. In this study, we aimed to unveil genes and pathways controlling scale formation through an integrated analysis of both transcriptome and proteome, of which G. przewalskii tissues of the dorsal skin (no scales) and the rump side skin (with scales) were sequenced. The sequencing results were further combined with cellular experiments to clarify the relationship between genes and signaling pathways. Results The results indicated the following: (1) a total of 4,904 differentially expressed genes were screened out, including 3,294 upregulated genes and 1,610 downregulated genes (with a filtering threshold of |log2Fold-Change|> 1 and p-adjust < 0.05). The identified differentially expressed genes contained family members such as FGF, EDAR, Wnt10, and bmp. (2) A total of 535 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were filtered out from the proteome, with 204 DEPs downregulated and 331 DEPs upregulated (with a filtering threshold of |Fold-Change|> 1.5 and p < 0.05). (3) Integrated analyses of transcriptome and proteome revealed that emefp1, col1a1, col6a2, col16a1, krt8, and krt18 were important genes contributing to scale development and that PI3K-AKT was the most important signaling pathway involved. (4) With the use of the constructed G. przewalskii fibroblast cell line, emefp1, col1a1, col6a2, col16a1, krt8, and krt18 were confirmed to be positively regulated by the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway. Conclusion This study provides experimental evidence for PI3K-AKT controlled scale development in G. przewalskii and would benefit further study on stress adaptation, scale biomineralization, and the development of skin appendages.
BackgroundAging and tumorigenesis share intricate regulatory processes, that alter the genome, epigenome, transcriptome and immune landscape of tissues. Discovering the link between aging and cancer in terms of multiomics characteristics remains a challenge for biomedical researchers.MethodsWe collected high-throughput datasets for 57 human tumors and 20 normal tissues, including 23,125 samples with age information. On the basis of these sufficient omics data, we introduced six useful modules including genomic (somatic mutation and copy number variation), gene expression, DNA methylation, hallmarks (aging and cancer), immune landscape (immune infiltration, immune pathways, immune signatures, and antitumor immune activities) and survival analysis. Correlation and differential analyses were performed for the multiomic signatures associated with aging at the gene level.ResultsWe developed Aging2Cancer (http://210.37.77.200:8080/Aging2Cancer/index.jsp), which is a comprehensive database and analysis platform for revealing the associations between aging and cancer. Users can search for and visualize the results of genes of interest to explore the relationships between aging and cancer at the gene level for different omics levels.ConclusionsWe believe that Aging2Cancer is a valuable resource for identifying novel biomarkers and will serve as a bridge for linking aging to cancer.
BackgroundIn this study, we present a novel method for reference-based cell deconvolution using data from DNA methylation arrays. Different from existing methods like IDOL-Ext, which operate on probe-level data, our approach represents features in the principal component analysis (PCA) space for cell type deconvolution.ResultsOur method's accuracy in estimating cell compositions is validated across various public datasets, including blood samples from glioma patients. It demonstrates precision comparable to IDOL-Ext, with R2 values ranging from 0.73 to 0.99 for most cell types, while offering improved discrimination between similar cell types, particularly T cell subtypes in glioma patient samples (R2 0.42-0.75 vs. 0.36-0.66 for IDOL-Ext). However, both methods showed lower accuracy for certain cell types, such as memory CD8 T cells in glioma patients (R2 0.42 vs. 0.36 for IDOL-Ext), highlighting the challenges in distinguishing closely related cell populations. We have made this method available as an R package "BloodCellDecon" on GitHub.ConclusionsOur study confirms the efficacy of cell type deconvolution in PCA space. The results indicate wide-ranging applicability and potential for adaptation to other forms of genomic data.
Background The herbaceous peony (Paeonia lactiflora Pall.) is extensively cultivated in China due to its root being used as a traditional Chinese medicine known as 'Radix Paeoniae Alba'. In recent years, it has been discovered that its seeds incorporate abundant unsaturated fatty acids, thereby presenting a potential new oilseed plant. Surprisingly, little is known about the full-length transcriptome sequencing of Paeonia lactiflora, limiting research into its gene function and molecular mechanisms. Results A total of 484,931 Reads of Inserts (ROI) sequences and 1,455,771 full-Length non-chimeric reads (FLNC) sequences were obtained for CDS prediction, TF analysis, SSR analysis and lncRNA identification. In addition, gene function annotation and gene structure analysis were performed. A total of 4905 transcripts were related to lipid metabolism biosynthesis pathway, belonging to 28 enzymes. We use these data to identify 10 oleosin (OLE) and 5 diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT) gene members after de-redundancy. The analysis of physicochemical properties and secondary structure showed them similarity in gene family respectively. The phylogenetic analysis showed that the distribution of OLE and DGAT family members was roughly the same as that of Arabidopsis. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analyses revealed expression changes in different seed development stages, and showed a trend of increasing and then decreasing. Conclusion In summary, these results provide new insights into the molecular mechanism of triacylglycerol (TAG) biosynthesis and storage during the seedling stage in Paeonia lactiflora. It provides theoretical references for selecting and breeding oil varieties and understanding the functions of oil storage as well as lipid synthesis related genes in Paeonia lactiflora.
BackgroundDrug addiction is a serious problem worldwide and is influenced by genetic factors. The present study aimed to investigate the association between genetics and drug addiction among Han Chinese.MethodsA total of 1000 Chinese users of illicit drugs and 9693 healthy controls were enrolled and underwent single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based and haplotype-based association analyses via whole-genome genotyping.ResultsBoth single-SNP and haplotype tests revealed associations between illicit drug use and several immune-related genes in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region (SNP association: log10BF = 15.135, p = 1.054e-18; haplotype association: log10BF = 20.925, p = 2.065e-24). These genes may affect the risk of drug addiction via modulation of the neuroimmune system. The single-SNP test exclusively reported genome-wide significant associations between rs3782886 (SNP association: log10BF = 8.726, p = 4.842e-11) in BRAP and rs671 (SNP association: log10BF = 7.406, p = 9.333e-10) in ALDH2 and drug addiction. The haplotype test exclusively reported a genome-wide significant association (haplotype association: log10BF = 7.607, p = 3.342e-11) between a region with allelic heterogeneity on chromosome 22 and drug addiction, which may be involved in the pathway of vitamin B12 transport and metabolism, indicating a causal link between lower vitamin B12 levels and methamphetamine addiction.ConclusionsThese findings provide new insights into risk-modeling and the prevention and treatment of methamphetamine and heroin dependence, which may further contribute to potential novel therapeutic approaches.
BackgroundXinjiang Mongolian cattle is an indigenous breed that inhabits the Taklimakan Desert and is characterized by its small body size. However, the genomic diversity, origin, and genetic basis underlying the adaptation to the desert environment have been poorly studied.ResultsWe analyzed patterns of Xinjiang Mongolian cattle genetic variation by sequencing 20 genomes together with seven previously sequenced genomes and comparing them to the 134 genomes of nine representative breeds worldwide. Among the breeds of Bos taurus, we found the highest nucleotide diversity (0.0024) associated with the lower inbreeding coefficient (2.0110-6), the lowest linkage disequilibrium (r2 = 0.3889 at distance of 10 kb), and the highest effective population size (181 at 20 generations ago) in Xinjiang Mongolian cattle. The genomic diversity pattern could be explained by a limited introgression of Bos indicus genes. More importantly, similarly to desert-adapted camel and same-habitat sheep, we also identified signatures of selection including genes, GO terms, and/or KEGG pathways controlling water reabsorption and osmoregulation, metabolic regulation and energy balance, as well as small body size in Xinjiang Mongolian cattle.ConclusionsOur results imply that Xinjiang Mongolian cattle might have acquired distinct genomic diversity by virtue of the introgression of Bos indicus, which helps understand the demographic history. The identification of selection signatures can provide novel insights into the genomic basis underlying the adaptation of Xinjiang Mongolian cattle to the desert environment.
Background Lipoxygenase (LOX) is a multifunctional enzyme that is primarily related to plant organ growth and development, biotic and abiotic stress responses, and production of flavor-associated metabolites. In higher plants, the LOX family encompasses several isozymes with varying expression patterns between tissues and developmental stages. These affect processes including seed germination, seed storage, seedling growth, fruit ripening, and leaf senescence. LOX family genes have multiple functions in response to hormones such as methyl jasmonate (MeJA) and salicylic acid. <br /> Results In this study, we identified 30 and 95 LOX homologs in Medicago truncatula and Medicago sativa, respectively. These genes were characterized with analyses of their basic physical and chemical properties, structures, chromosomal distributions, and phylogenetic relationships to understand structural variations and their physical locations. Phylogenetic analysis was conducted for members of the three LOX subfamilies (9-LOX, type I 13-LOX, and type II 13-LOX) in Arabidopsis thaliana, Glycine max, M. truncatula, and M. sativa. Analysis of predicted promoter elements revealed several relevant cis-acting elements in MtLOX and MsLOX genes, including abscisic acid (ABA) response elements (ABREs), MeJA response elements (CGTCA-motifs), and antioxidant response elements (AREs). Cis-element data combined with transcriptomic data demonstrated that LOX gene family members in these species were most likely related to abiotic stress responses, hormone responses, and plant development. Gene expression patterns were confirmed via quantitative reverse transcription PCR. Several MtLOX genes (namely MtLOX15, MtLOX16, MtLOX20, and MtLOX24) belonging to the type I 13-LOX subfamily and other LOX genes (MtLOX7, MtLOX11, MsLOX23, MsLOX87, MsLOX90, and MsLOX94) showed significantly different expression levels in the flower tissue, suggesting roles in reproductive growth. Type I 13-LOXs (MtLOX16, MtLOX20, MtLOX21, MtLOX24, MsLOX57, MsLOX84, MsLOX85, and MsLOX94) and type II 13-LOXs (MtLOX5, MtLOX6, MtLOX9, MtLOX10, MsLOX18, MsLOX23, and MsLOX30) were MeJA-inducible and were predicted to function in the jasmonic acid signaling pathway. Furthermore, exogenous MtLOX24 expression in Arabidopsis verified that MtLOX24 was involved in MeJA responses, which may be related to insect-induced abiotic stress. Conclusions We identified six and four LOX genes specifically expressed in the flowers of M. truncatula and M. sativa, respectively. Eight and seven LOX genes were induced by MeJA in M. truncatula and M. sativa, and the LOX genes identified were mainly distributed in the type I and type II 13-LOX subfamilies. MtLOX24 was up-regulated at 8 h after MeJA induction, and exogenous expression in Arabidopsis demonstrated that MtLOX24 promoted resistance to MeJA-induced stress. This study provides valuable new information regarding the evolutionary history and functions of LOX genes in the genus Medicago.
Background Puberty onset signifies the beginning of sexual maturation and reproductive phase in poultry indeed, and plays an essential role in genetics and breeding. Studying gonadal development is one of the important approaches to exploring the genetic mechanism of puberty onset. Result In our study, the phenotype data of the testes and ovaries of the 120-day-old Nonghua duck showed a large coefficient of variation, indicating that their gonads were in different developmental states. The CNV-based GWAS results for 358 Nonghua ducks showed two deleted-type CNVRs were associated with testicular weight (TW) and testicular percentage (TP), namely CNVR492 (Chr2: 59473501-59478500 bp) and CNVR494 (Chr2: 59514001-59517000 bp). Additionally, two both-type CNVRs were associated with ovarian weight (OW) and ovarian percentage (OP), namely CNVR557 (Chr2: 99951001-99956500 bp) and CNVR891 (Chr7: 39115001-39122500 bp). RNA-seq analysis showed 6228 and 1070 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to the TW and OW. These DEGs were mainly enriched in the MAPK signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and focal adhesion, which were reported to affect gonadal development. Further, by joint analysis of CNV-based GWAS and RNA-seq data, 3 genes, including LOC106019197, CDH19 (LOC101793040), and TYW5 were identified as potential candidate genes for TW and OW. LOC106019197 and CDH19 were down-regulated in the heavier-testes group (> 5 g), while TYW5 was also down-regulated in the heavier-ovaries group (> 3 g). The qRT-PCR revealed that LOC106019197 and CDH19 exhibited higher expression levels in the wild/CN0 and CN0/CN0 genotypes compared to the wild/wild genotype. TYW5 showed the highest expression level in the wild/CN0 genotype and the lowest in the CN2/CN2 genotype. In addition, the expression levels of LOC106019197 and CDH19 were significantly higher at 0w than at 8w and 24w. Conclusion Our results revealed that LOC106019197 and CDH19 may act as inhibitors of duck testicular development. TYW5 may play a role in delaying ovarian development. These findings provide new insights into the mechanism of puberty onset in ducks.
Background Melilotus, a member of the Fabaceae family, is a pivotal forage crop that is extensively cultivated in livestock regions globally due to its notable productivity and ability to withstand abiotic stress. However, the genetic attributes of the chloroplast genome and the evolutionary connections among different Melilotus species remain unresolved. Results In this study, we compiled the chloroplast genomes of 18 Melilotus species and performed a comprehensive comparative analysis. Through the examination of protein-coding genes, we successfully established a robust phylogenetic tree for these species. This conclusion is further supported by the phylogeny derived from single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across the entire chloroplast genome. Notably, our findings revealed that M. infestus, M. siculus, M. sulcatus, and M. speciosus formed a distinct subgroup within the phylogenetic tree. Additionally, the chloroplast genomes of these four species exhibit two shared inversions. Moreover, inverted repeats were observed to have reemerged in six species within the IRLC. The distribution patterns of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertions/deletions (InDels) within protein-coding genes indicated that ycf1 and ycf2 accumulated nonconservative alterations during evolutionary development. Furthermore, an examination of the evolutionary rate of protein-coding genes revealed that rps18, rps7, and rpl16 underwent positive selection specifically in Melilotus. Conclusions We present a comparative analysis of the complete chloroplast genomes of Melilotus species. This study represents the most thorough and detailed exploration of the evolution and variability within the genus Melilotus to date. Our study provides valuable chloroplast genomic information for improving phylogenetic reconstructions and making biogeographic inferences about Melilotus and other Papilionoideae species.
Background The infection of carbapenem-resistant organisms was a huge threat to human health due to their global spread. Dealing with a carbapenem-resistant Serratia marcescens (CRSM) infection poses a significant challenge in clinical settings. This study aims to provide insights into strategies for controlling CRSM infection by exploring the transformation mechanism of carbapenem-resistance.Methods We used whole genome sequencing (WGS) to investigate the mechanism of carbapenem resistance in 14 S. marcescens isolates in vivo. The expression level of related genes and the minimum inhibitory concentration of meropenem (MICMEM) were also evaluated to confirm the mechanism of carbapenem resistance.Results Seven groups of S. marcescens, each consisting of two strains, were collected from a hospital and displayed a shift in MICMEM from low to high levels. Homology analysis revealed that the isolates in five groups were significantly different from the remaining two. WGS and experimental evidence indicated that four groups of strains developed carbapenem resistance by acquiring the bla(KPC) (obtaining group), while two groups (persisting group) increased the expression level of the bla(KPC). In contrast, isolates in the last group (missing group) did not carry the bla(KPC). All strains possessed multiple beta-lactamase genes, including bla(CTX-M-14), bla(SRT-1), and bla(SRT-2). However, only in the missing group, the carbapenem-resistant strain lost an outer membrane protein-encoding gene, leading to increased bla(CTX-M-14) expression compared to the carbapenem-susceptible strain.Conclusion The study findings suggest that S. marcescens strains developed diverse carbapenem resistance in vivo through the evolution of drug resistance, rather than through clone replacement. We hypothesize that carbapenem resistance in S. marcescens was due to certain clonal types with a distinct mechanism.
Background Traditional recombinant inbred lines (RILs) are generated from repeated self-fertilization or brother-sister mating from the F1 hybrid of two inbred parents. Compared with the F2 population, RILs cumulate more crossovers between loci and thus increase the number of recombinants, resulting in an increased resolution of genetic mapping. Since they are inbred to the isogenic stage, another consequence of the heterozygosity reduction is the increased genetic variance and thus the increased power of QTL detection. Self-fertilization is the primary form of developing RILs in plants. Brother-sister mating is another way to develop RILs but in small laboratory animals. To ensure that the RILs have at least 98% of homozygosity, we need about seven generations of self-fertilization or 20 generations of brother-sister mating. Prior to homozygosity, these lines are called pre-recombinant inbred lines (PRERIL). Phenotypic values of traits in PRERILs are often collected but not used in QTL mapping. To perform QTL mapping in PRERILs, we need the recombination fraction between two markers at generation t for t < 7 (selfing) or t < 20 (brother-sister mating) so that the genotypes of QTL flanked by the markers can be inferred. Results In this study, we developed formulas to calculate the recombination fractions of PRERILs at generation t in self-fertilization, brother-sister mating, and random mating. In contrast to existing works in this topic, we used computer code to construct the transition matrix to form the Markov chain of genotype array between consecutive generations, the so-called recurrent equations. Conclusions We provide R functions to calculate the recombination fraction using the newly developed recurrent equations of ordered genotype array. With the recurrent equations and the R code, users can perform QTL mapping in PRERILs. Substantial time and effort can be saved compared with QTL mapping in RILs.
Background The genus Sulfitobacter, a member of the family Roseobacteraceae, is widely distributed in the ocean and is believed to play crucial roles in the global sulfur cycle. However, gene clusters associated with sulfur oxidation in genomes of the type strains of this genus have been poorly studied. Furthermore, taxonomic errors have been identified in this genus, potentially leading to significant confusion in ecological and evolutionary interpretations in subsequent studies of the genus Sulfitobacter. This study aims to investigate the taxonomic status of this genus and explore the metabolism associated with sulfur oxidation. Results This study suggests that Sulfitobacter algicola does not belong to Sulfitobacter and should be reclassified into a novel genus, for which we propose the name Parasulfitobacter gen. nov., with Parasulfitobacter algicola comb. nov. as the type species. Additionally, enzymes involved in the sulfur oxidation process, such as the sulfur oxidization (Sox) system, the disulfide reductase protein family, and the sulfite dehydrogenase (SoeABC), were identified in almost all Sulfitobacter species. This finding implies that the majority of Sulfitobacter species can oxidize reduced sulfur compounds. Differences in the modular organization of sox gene clusters among Sulfitobacter species were identified, along with the presence of five genes with unknown function located in some of the sox gene clusters. Lastly, this study revealed the presence of the demethylation pathway and the cleavage pathway used by many Sulfitobacter species to degrade dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). These pathways enable these bacteria to utilize DMSP as important source of sulfur and carbon or as a defence strategy. Conclusions Our findings contribute to interpreting the mechanism by which Sulfitobacter species participate in the global sulfur cycle. The taxonomic rearrangement of S. algicola into the novel genus Parasulfitobacter will prevent confusion in ecological and evolutionary interpretations in future studies of the genus Sulfitobacter.
BackgroundThe zinc finger-homeodomain (ZF-HD) transcription factor family is widely involved in regulating plant growth and fruit filling, as well as responding to various abiotic stress. Rapeseed (Brassica napus L.), the second largest oil-producing crop in the world, is an annual or biennial herb of Brassica in Cruciferae. However, there is currently no systematic study on the evolutionary relationship and stress response of ZF-HD transcription factors in rapeseed.ResultsIn this study, 60 ZF-HD genes in B. napus (BnZHDs) were identified and named based on the chromosomal location. The evolutionary relationships, classifications, gene structures, motif compositions, chromosome localization, and gene replication events in these BnZHD genes were systematically analyzed. These 60 BnZHD members were divided into seven groups. According to the phylogenetic tree and repetitive events, subfamilies MIF, and V may have undergone stronger expansions during the evolutionary process. Interestingly, segmental duplications may have a more important contribution, which distinguishes them from other dicotyledon plants. To further investigate the evolutionary relationship of the ZF-HD family, we constructed eleven comparative genomic maps of homologous genes between rapeseed and different representative monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants. Finally, the gene expression pattern of 15 BnZHD genes from different subfamilies under different tissues, fruit developmental stages, and different abiotic stress were analyzed. The expression profile from real-time quantitative PCR analysis showed different expression patterns of BnZHD gene in B. napus. We found that certain BnZHD genes are preferentially expressed in specific tissues of B. napus, while most genes are expressed in multiple tissues. For example, BnZHD37, BnZHD53, and BnZHD55 may be sensitive to different hormones. Under different stresses, the expression of BnZHD3, BnZHD4, BnZHD7, BnZHD38, BnZD45, and BnZHD53 significantly increased in roots, stems, and leaves within 24 h. These genes may play important roles in the growth, development, and environmental adaptation of rapeseed.ConclusionsThese findings provide a basis for a comprehensive understanding of the ZF-HD family in rapeseed, which will provide information for further research on the functional characteristics of the BnZHD genes.
BackgroundBuffalo is a globally important livestock species, but its reproductive performance is relatively low than cattles. At present, dominant follicle development specific process and mechanistic role of follicular growth related genes in water buffaloes are not well understood. Therefore, we comprehensively performed transcriptomics of granulosa cells and oocytes from different-sized follicles in water buffalo to identify key candidate genes that influence follicle development and diameter, and further explored the potential regulatory mechanisms of granulosa cells and oocytes in the process of water buffalo follicle development.ResultsIn this study, we found918 granulosa cell transcripts and 1401 oocyte transcripts were correlated in follicles of different diameters, and the expression differences were significant. Subsequent enrichment analysis of the co-expressed differentially expressed transcripts identified several genes targeted by long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and associated with follicular development. Notably, the upregulation of BUB1 regulated by MSTRG.41325.4 and interactive action of SMAD2 and SMAD7 might have key regulatory role in follicular development. Additionally, we also detected key differentially expressed genes that potentially influence follicular hormone metabolism and growth, like ID2, CHRD, TGIF2 and MAD2L1, and constructed an interaction network between lncRNA transcripts and mRNAs.ConclusionsIn summary, this study preliminarily revealed the differences in gene expression patterns among buffalo follicles of different sizes and their potential molecular regulatory mechanisms. It provides a new perspective for exploring the mechanism of buffalo follicular dominance and improving buffalo reproductive performance.
Acinetobacter baumannii is a gram-negative bacillus prevalent in nature, capable of thriving under various environmental conditions. As an opportunistic pathogen, it frequently causes nosocomial infections such as urinary tract infections, bacteremia, and pneumonia, contributing to increased morbidity and mortality in clinical settings. Consequently, developing novel vaccines against Acinetobacter baumannii is of utmost importance. In our study, we identified 10 highly conserved antigenic proteins from the NCBI and UniProt databases for epitope mapping. We subsequently screened and selected 8 CTL, HTL, and LBL epitopes, integrating them into three distinct vaccines constructed with adjuvants. Following comprehensive evaluations of immunological and physicochemical parameters, we conducted molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations to assess the efficacy and stability of these vaccines. Our findings indicate that all three multi-epitope mRNA vaccines designed against Acinetobacter baumannii are promising; however, further animal studies are required to confirm their reliability and effectiveness.
BackgroundJianli pig, a renowned indigenous breed in China, has the characteristics of a two-end black (TEB) coat color, excellent meat quality, strong adaptability and increased prolificacy. However, there is limited information available regarding the genetic diversity, population structure and genomic regions under selection of Jianli pig. On the other hand, the genetic mechanism of TEB coat color has remained largely unknown.ResultsIn this study, the whole genome resequencing of 30 Jianli pigs within a context of 153 individuals representing 13 diverse breeds was performed. The population structure analysis revealed that Jianli pigs have close genetic relationships with the Tongcheng pig breed, their geographical neighbors. Three methods (observed heterozygosity, expected heterozygosity, and runs of homozygosity) implied a relatively high level of genetic diversity and, a low inbreeding coefficient in Jianli compared with other pigs. We used Fst and XP-EHH to detect the selection signatures in Jianli pigs compared with Asian wild boar. A total of 451 candidate genes influencing meat quality (CREBBP, ADCY9, EEPD1 and HDAC9), reproduction (ESR1 and FANCA), and coat color (EDNRB, MITF and MC1R), were detected by gene annotation analysis. Finally, to fine-map the genomic region for the two-end black (TEB) coat color phenotype in Jianli pigs, we performed three signature selection methods between the TEB coat color and no-TEB coat color pig breeds. The current study, further confirmed that the EDNRB gene is a candidate gene for TEB color phenotype found in Chinese pigs, including Jinhua pigs, and the haplotype harboring 25 SNPs in the EDNRB gene may promote the formation of TEB coat color. Further ATAC-seq and luciferase reporter assays of these regions suggest that the 25-SNPs region was a strong candidate causative mutation that regulates the TEB coat color phenotype by altering enhancer function.ConclusionOur results advanced the understanding of the genetic mechanism behind artificial selection, and provided further resources for the protection and breeding improvement of Jianli pigs.
Background Broussonetia papyrifera is an economically significant tree with high utilization value, yet its cultivation is often constrained by soil contamination with heavy metals (HMs). Effective scientific cultivation management, which enhances the yield and quality of B. papyrifera, necessitates an understanding of its regulatory mechanisms in response to HM stress. Results Twelve Metallothionein (MT) genes were identified in B. papyrifera. Their open reading frames ranged from 186 to 372 bp, encoding proteins of 61 to 123 amino acids with molecular weights between 15,473.77 and 29,546.96 Da, and theoretical isoelectric points from 5.24 to 5.32. Phylogenetic analysis classified these BpMTs into three subclasses: MT1, MT2, and MT3, with MT2 containing seven members and MT3 only one. The expression of most BpMT genes was inducible by Cd, Mn, Cu, Zn, and abscisic acid (ABA) treatments, particularly BpMT2e, BpMT2d, BpMT2c, and BpMT1c, which showed significant responses and warrant further study. Yeast cells expressing these BpMT genes exhibited enhanced tolerance to Cd, Mn, Cu, and Zn stresses compared to control cells. Yeasts harboring BpMT1c, BpMT2e, and BpMT2d demonstrated higher accumulation of Cd, Cu, Mn, and Zn, suggesting a chelation and binding capacity of BpMTs towards HMs. Site-directed mutagenesis of cysteine (Cys) residues indicated that mutations in the C domain of type 1 BpMT led to increased sensitivity to HMs and reduced HM accumulation in yeast cells; While in type 2 BpMTs, the contribution of N and C domain to HMs' chelation possibly corelated to the quantity of Cys residues. Conclusion The BpMT genes are crucial in responding to diverse HM stresses and are involved in ABA signaling. The Cys-rich domains of BpMTs are pivotal for HM tolerance and chelation. This study offers new insights into the structure-function relationships and metal-binding capabilities of type-1 and - 2 plant MTs, enhancing our understanding of their roles in plant adaptation to HM stresses.
Background The lesser grain borer (Rhyzopertha dominica), a worldwide primary pest of stored grain, causes serious economic losses and threatens stored food safety. R. dominica can respond to changes in temperature, especially the adaptability to heat. In this study, transcriptome analysis of R. dominica exposed to different temperatures was performed to elucidate differences in gene expression and the underling molecular mechanism. Results Isoform-sequencing generated 17,721,200 raw reads and yielded 20,416 full-length transcripts. A total of 18,880 (92.48%) transcripts were annotated. We extracted RNA from R. dominica reared at 5 degrees C (cold stress), 15 degrees C (cold stress), 27 degrees C (ambient temperature) and 40 degrees C (heat stress) for RNA-seq. Compared to those of control insects reared at 27 degrees C, 119, 342, and 875 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified at 5 degrees C, 15 degrees C, and 40 degrees C, respectively. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis revealed that pathways associated with "fatty acid metabolism", "fatty acid biosynthesis", "AMPK signaling pathway", "neuroactive ligand receptor interaction", and "longevity regulating pathway-multiple species" were significantly enriched. The functional annotation revealed that the genes encoding heat shock proteins (HSPs), fatty acid synthase (FAS), phospholipases (PLA), trehalose transporter (TPST), trehalose 6-phosphate synthase (TPS), and vitellogenin (Vg) were most likely involved in temperature regulation, which was also validated by RT-qPCR. Seven candidate genes (rdhsp1, rdfas1, rdpla1, rdtpst1, rdtps1, rdvg1, and rdP450) were silenced in the RNA interference (RNAi) assay. RNAi of each candidate gene suggested that inhibiting rdtps1 expression significantly decreased the trehalose level and survival rate of R. dominica at 40 degrees C. Conclusions These results indicated that trehalose contributes to the high temperature resistance of R. dominica. Our study elucidates the molecular mechanisms underlying heat tolerance and provides a potential target for the pest management in R. dominica.
Background SPL transcription factors play vital roles in regulating plant growth, development, and abiotic stress responses. Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.), one of the world's main sugar-producing crops, is a major source of edible and industrial sugars for humans. Although the SPL gene family has been extensively identified in other species, no reports on the SPL gene family in sugar beet are available.Results Eight BvSPL genes were identified at the whole-genome level and were renamed based on their positions on the chromosome. The gene structure, SBP domain sequences, and phylogenetic relationship with Arabidopsis were analyzed for the sugar beet SPL gene family. The eight BvSPL genes were divided into six groups (II, IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII). Of the BvSPL genes, no tandem duplication events were found, but one pair of segmental duplications was present. Multiple cis-regulatory elements related to growth and development were identified in the 2000-bp region upstream of the BvSPL gene start codon (ATG). Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), the expression profiles of the eight BvSPL genes were examined under eight types of abiotic stress and during the maturation stage. BvSPL transcription factors played a vital role in abiotic stress, with BvSPL3 and BvSPL6 being particularly noteworthy.Conclusion Eight sugar beet SPL genes were identified at the whole-genome level. Phylogenetic trees, gene structures, gene duplication events, and expression profiles were investigated. The qRT-PCR analysis indicated that BvSPLs play a substantial role in the growth and development of sugar beet, potentially participating in the regulation of root expansion and sugar accumulation.
BackgroundExploring the hypoxia adaptation mechanism of Tibetan chicken is of great significance for revealing the survival law of Tibetan chicken and plateau animal husbandry production. To investigate the hypoxia adaptation of Tibetan chickens (TBCs), an integrative metabolomic-transcriptomic analysis of the liver on day 18 of embryonic development was performed. Dwarf laying chickens (DLCs), a lowland breed, were used as a control.ResultsA total of 1,908 metabolites were identified in both TBCs and DLCs. Energy metabolism and amino acid metabolism related differentially regulated metabolites (DRMs) were significantly enriched under hypoxia. Important metabolic pathways including the TCA cycle and arginine and proline metabolism were screened; PCK1, SUCLA2, and CPS1 were found to be altered under hypoxic conditions. In addition, integrated analysis suggested potential differences in mitochondrial function, which may play a crucial role in the study of chicken oxygen adaptation.ConclusionsThese results suggest that hypoxia changed the gene expression and metabolic patterns of embryonic liver of TBCs compared to DLCs. Our study provides a basis for uncovering the molecular regulation mechanisms of hypoxia adaptation in TBCs with the potential application of hypoxia adaptation research for other animals living on the Qinghai-Tibet plateau, and may even contribute to the study of diseases caused by hypoxia.
Background Novel protein-coding genes were considered to be born by re-organization of pre-existing genes, such as gene duplication and gene fusion. However, recent progress of genome research revealed that more protein-coding genes than expected were born de novo, that is, gene origination by accumulating mutations in non-genic DNA sequences. Nonetheless, the in-depth process (scenario) for de novo origination is not well understood. Results We have conceived bioinformatic analysis for sketching a scenario for de novo origination of protein-coding genes. For each de novo protein-coding gene, we firstly identified an edge of a given phylogenetic tree where the gene was born based on parsimony. Then, from a multiple sequence alignment of the de novo gene and its orthologous regions, we constructed ancestral DNA sequences of the gene corresponding to both end nodes of the edge. We finally revealed statistical features observed in evolution between the two ancestral sequences. In the analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae lineage, we have successfully sketched a putative scenario for de novo origination of protein-coding genes. (1) In the beginning was GC-rich genome regions. (2) Neutral mutations were accumulated in the regions. (3) ORFs were extended/combined, and then (4) translation signature (Kozak consensus sequence) was recruited. Interestingly, as the scenario progresses from (2) to (4), the specificity of mutations increases. Conclusion To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report outlining a scenario of de novo origination of protein-coding genes. Our bioinformatic analysis can capture events that occur during a short evolutionary time by directly observing the evolution of the ancestral sequences from non-genic to genic. This property is suitable for the analysis of fast evolving de novo genes.
BackgroundMicrobes produce diverse bioactive natural products with applications in fields such as medicine and agriculture. In their genomes, these natural products are encoded by physically clustered genes known as biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). Genome and metagenome sequencing advances have enabled high-throughput identification of BGCs as a promising avenue for natural product discovery. BGC mining from (meta)genomes using in silico tools has allowed access to a vast diversity of potentially novel natural products. However, a fundamental limitation has been the ability to assemble complete BGCs, especially from complex metagenomes. With their fragmented assemblies, short-read technologies struggle to recover complete BGCs, such as the long and repetitive nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) and polyketide synthase (PKS). Recent advances in long-read sequencing, such as the High Fidelity (HiFi) technology from PacBio, have reduced this limitation and can help retrieve both accurate and complete BGCs from metagenomes, warranting improvement in the existing BGC identification approach for better utilization of HiFi data.ResultsHere, we present HiFiBGC, a command-line-based workflow to identify BGCs in PacBio HiFi metagenomes. HiFiBGC leverages an ensemble of assemblies from three HiFi-tailored metagenome assemblers and the reads not represented in these assemblies. Based on our analyses of four HiFi metagenomic datasets from four different environments, we show that HiFiBGC identifies, on average, 78% more BGCs than the top-performing single-assembler-based method. This increase is due to HiFiBGC's ensemble assembly approach, which improves recovery by 25%, as well as from the inclusion of mostly fragmented BGCs identified in the unmapped reads.ConclusionsHiFiBGC is a computational workflow for identifying BGCs in long-read HiFi metagenomes, implemented majorly using Python programming language and workflow manager Snakemake. HiFiBGC is available on GitHub at https://github.com/ay-amityadav/HiFiBGC under the MIT license. The code related to the figures and analyses presented in the manuscript is available at https://github.com/ay-amityadav/HiFiBGC_analyses.
Lumpy skin disease virus (LSDV) belongs to the genus Capripoxvirus and family Poxviridae. LSDV was endemic in most of Africa, the Middle East and Turkey, but since 2015, several outbreaks have been reported in other countries. In this study, we used whole genome sequencing approach to investigate the origin of the outbreak and understand the genomic landscape of the virus. Our study showed that the LSDV strain of 2022 outbreak exhibited many genetic variations compared to the Reference Neethling strain sequence and the previous field strains. A total of 1819 variations were found in 22 genome sequences, which includes 399 extragenic mutations, 153 insertion frameshift mutations, 234 deletion frameshift mutations, 271 Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 762 silent SNPs. Thirty-eight genes have more than 2 variations per gene, and these genes belong to viral-core proteins, viral binding proteins, replication, and RNA polymerase proteins. We highlight the importance of several SNPs in various genes, which may play an essential role in the pathogenesis of LSDV. Phylogenetic analysis performed on all whole genome sequences of LSDV showed two types of variants in India. One group of the variant with fewer mutations was found to lie closer to the LSDV 2019 strain from Ranchi while the other group clustered with previous Russian outbreaks from 2015. Our study highlights the importance of genomic characterization of viral outbreaks to not only monitor the frequency of mutations but also address its role in pathogenesis of LSDV as the outbreak continues.
Background Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a heritable neurodegenerative disease whose long asymptomatic phase makes the early diagnosis of it pivotal. Blood U-p53 has recently emerged as a superior predictive biomarker for AD in the early stages. We hypothesized that genetic variants associated with blood U-p53 could reveal novel loci and pathways involved in the early stages of AD.Results We performed a blood U-p53 Genome-wide association study (GWAS) on 484 healthy and mild cognitively impaired subjects from the ADNI cohort using 612,843 Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We performed a pathway analysis and prioritized candidate genes using an AD single-cell gene program. We fine-mapped the intergenic SNPs by leveraging a cell-type-specific enhancer-to-gene linking strategy using a brain single-cell multimodal dataset. We validated the candidate genes in an independent brain single-cell RNA-seq and the ADNI blood transcriptome datasets. The rs279686 between AASS and FEZF1 genes was the most significant SNP (p-value = 4.82 x 10-7). Suggestive pathways were related to the immune and nervous systems. Twenty-three candidate genes were prioritized at 27 suggestive loci. Fine-mapping of 5 intergenic loci yielded nine cell-specific candidate genes. Finally, 15 genes were validated in the independent single-cell RNA-seq dataset, and five were validated in the ADNI blood transcriptome dataset.Conclusions We underlined the importance of performing a GWAS on an early-stage biomarker of AD and leveraging functional omics datasets for pinpointing causal genes in AD. Our study prioritized nine genes (SORCS1, KIF5C, TMEFF2, TMEM63C, HLA-E, ATAT1, TUBB, ARID1B, and RUNX1) strongly implicated in the early stages of AD.
Background An invasion occurs when introduced species establish and maintain stable populations in areas outside of their native habitat. Adaptive evolution has been proposed to contribute to this process. The fall armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda) is one of the major pest insects infesting maize in both invaded and native areas. The invasion of this species was reported from West Africa in 2016, followed by spreading across the Old World. We tested adaptive evolution to maize using 56 native samples from the USA and 59 invasive samples from Senegal, based on genomic and transcriptomic analyses. Results Principal component analysis revealed that the Senegalese population originated from corn strain. Three genetic loci were identified as targets of selective sweeps in the Senegalese population. These loci include four Cytochrome P450 genes (CYP321B1, CYP321B3, CYP321B4, and CYP337B5), as well as 12 genes of which the function is unclear. Transcriptomic analysis showed an overexpression of CYP321B1 and CYP321B3 genes in sfC samples compared to sfR samples. Additionally, these two genes were overexpressed when corn strain samples were exposed to maize. In larval feeding assays, the Senegalese population exhibited higher survival rates than a Floridan population across all four tested maize varieties. Conclusions These results suggest that the analyzed Senegalese population experienced adaptive evolution involving loci containing CYP genes, potentially associated with an increase in the survival rates on maize. We argue that the invasive success of the fall armyworm is contributed by stabilizing selection to maize.
Compound eyes formation in decapod crustaceans occurs after the nauplius stage. However, the key genes and regulatory mechanisms of compound eye development during crustacean embryonic development have not yet been clarified. In this study, RNA-seq was used to investigate the gene expression profiles of Neocaridina denticulata sinensis from nauplius to zoea stage. Based on RNA-seq data analysis, the phototransduction and insect hormone biosynthesis pathways were enriched, and molting-related neuropeptides were highly expressed. There was strong cell proliferation in the embryo prior to compound eye development. The formation of the visual system and the hormonal regulation of hatching were the dominant biological events during compound eye development. The functional analysis of DEGs across all four developmental stages showed that cuticle formation, muscle growth and the establishment of immune system occurred from nauplius to zoea stage. Key genes related to eye development were discovered, including those involved in the determination and differentiation of the eye field, eye-color formation, and visual signal transduction. In conclusion, the results increase the understanding of the molecular mechanism of eye formation in crustacean embryonic stage.
Background Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignant tumors worldwide. Nevertheless, GC still lacks effective diagnosed and monitoring method and treating targets. This study used multi omics data to explore novel biomarkers and immune therapy targets around sphingolipids metabolism genes (SMGs).Method LASSO regression analysis was performed to filter prognostic and differently expression SMGs among TCGA and GTEx data. Risk score model and Kaplan-Meier were built to validate the prognostic SMG signature and prognostic nomogram was further constructed. The biological functions of SMG signature were annotated via multi omics. The heterogeneity landscape of immune microenvironment in GC was explored. qRT-PCR was performed to validate the expression level of SMG signature. Competing endogenous RNA regulatory network was established to explore the molecular regulatory mechanisms.Result 3-SMGs prognostic signature (GLA, LAMC1, TRAF2) and related nomogram were constructed combing several clinical characterizes. The expression difference and diagnostic value were validated by PCR data. Multi omics data reveals 3-SMG signature affects cell cycle and death via several signaling pathways to regulate GC progression. Overexpression of 3-SMG signature influenced various immune cell infiltration in GC microenvironment. RBP-SMGs-miRNA-mRNAs/lncRNAs regulatory network was built to annotate regulatory system.Conclusion Upregulated 3-SMGs signature are excellent predictive diagnosed and prognostic biomarkers, providing a new perspective for future GC immunotherapy.
Background Acer truncatum Bunge is an economic, ecological, oil, and medicinal tree, and its kernel oil is rich in nervonic acid. It is crucial to explore the transcriptional expression patterns of genes affecting fatty acid synthesis to improve the quality of Acer truncatum oil. Results This study used the seeds from high fatty acid strain YQC and those from low fatty acid strain Y38 as the test materials. Specifically, we performed a comparative transcriptome analysis of Y38 seeds and YQC to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) at two time points (seeds 30 days after the blooming period and 90 days after the blooming period). Compared with YQC_1 (YQC seeds at 30 days after the blooming period), a total of 3,618 DEGs were identified, including 2,333 up-regulated and 1,285 downregulated DEGs in Y38_1 (Y38 seeds at 30 days after blooming period). In the Y38_2 (Y38 seeds at 90 days after the blooming period) versus YQC_2 (YQC seeds at 90 days after the blooming period) comparison group, 9,340 genes were differentially expressed, including 5,422 up-regulated and 3,918 down-regulated genes. The number of DEGs in Y38 compared to YQC was significantly higher in the late stages of seed development. Gene functional enrichment analyses showed that the DEGs were mainly involved in the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway. And two fatty acid synthesis-related genes and seven nervonic acid synthesis-related genes were validated by qRT-PCR. Conclusions This study provides a basis for further research on biosynthesizing fatty acids and nervonic acidnervonic acids in A. truncatum seeds.
BackgroundCotton serves as a primary source of natural fibers crucial for the textile industry. However, environmental elements such as drought have posed challenges to cotton cultivation, resulting in adverse impacts on both production and fiber quality. Improving cotton's resilience to drought could mitigate yield losses and foster the expansion of cotton farming. Rab7 protein, widely present in organisms, controls the degradation and recycling of cargo, and has a potential role in biotic and abiotic tolerance. However, comprehensive exploration of the Rab7 gene family in Gossypium remains scarce.ResultsHerein, we identified a total of 10, 10, 20, and 20 Rab7 genes through genome-wide analysis in Gossypium arboreum, Gossypium raimondii, Gossypium hirsutum, and Gossypium barbadense, respectively. Collinearity analysis unveiled the pivotal role of whole genome or segmental duplication events in the expansion of GhRab7s. Study of gene architecture, conserved protein motifs, and domains suggested the conservation of structure and function throughout evolution. Exploration of cis-regulatory elements revealed the responsiveness of GhRab7 genes to abiotic stress, corroborated by transcriptome analysis under diverse environmental stresses. Notably, the greatly induced expression of GhRab7B3-A under drought treatment prompted us to investigate its function through virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) assays. Silencing GhRab7B3-A led to exacerbated dehydration and wilting compared with the control. Additionally, inhibition of stomatal closure, antioxidant enzyme activities and expression patterns of genes responsive to abiotic stress were observed in GhRab7B3-A silenced plants.ConclusionsThis study sheds light on Rab7 members in cotton, identifies a gene linked to drought stress, and paves the way for additional investigation of Rab7 genes associated with drought stress tolerance.
Background Jasmonate ZIM-domain (JAZ) proteins, which act as negative regulators in the jasmonic acid (JA) signalling pathway, have significant implications for plant development and response to abiotic stress. Results Through a comprehensive genome-wide analysis, a total of 20 members of the JAZ gene family specific to alfalfa were identified in its genome. Phylogenetic analysis divided these 20 MsJAZ genes into five subgroups. Gene structure analysis, protein motif analysis, and 3D protein structure analysis revealed that alfalfa JAZ genes in the same evolutionary branch share similar exon-intron, motif, and 3D structure compositions. Eight segmental duplication events were identified among these 20 MsJAZ genes through collinearity analysis. Among the 32 chromosomes of the autotetraploid cultivated alfalfa, there were 20 MsJAZ genes distributed on 17 chromosomes. Extensive stress-related cis-acting elements were detected in the upstream sequences of MsJAZ genes, suggesting that their response to stress has an underlying function. Furthermore, the expression levels of MsJAZ genes were examined across various tissues and under the influence of salt stress conditions, revealing tissue-specific expression and regulation by salt stress. Through RT-qPCR experiments, it was discovered that the relative expression levels of these six MsJAZ genes increased under salt stress. Conclusions In summary, our study represents the first comprehensive identification and analysis of the JAZ gene family in alfalfa. These results provide important information for exploring the mechanism of JAZ genes in alfalfa salt tolerance and identifying candidate genes for improving the salt tolerance of autotetraploid cultivated alfalfa via genetic engineering in the future.
The fleece traits are important economic traits of goats. With the reduction of sequencing and genotyping cost and the improvement of related technologies, genomic selection for goats has become possible. The research collect pedigree, phenotype and genotype information of 2299 Inner Mongolia Cashmere goats (IMCGs) individuals. We estimate fixed effects, and compare the estimates of variance components, heritability and genomic predictive ability of fleece traits in IMCGs when using the pedigree based Best Linear Unbiased Prediction (ABLUP), Genomic BLUP (GBLUP) or single-step GBLUP (ssGBLUP). The fleece traits considered are cashmere production (CP), cashmere diameter (CD), cashmere length (CL) and fiber length (FL). It was found that year of production, sex, herd and individual ages had highly significant effects on the four fleece traits (P < 0.01). All of these factors should be considered when the genetic parameters of fleece traits in IMCGs are evaluated. The heritabilities of FL, CL, CP and CD with ABLUP, GBLUP and ssGBLUP methods were 0.26 similar to 0.31, 0.05 similar to 0.08, 0.15 similar to 0.20 and 0.22 similar to 0.28, respectively. Therefore, it can be inferred that the genetic progress of CL is relatively slow. The predictive ability of fleece traits in IMCGs with GBLUP (56.18% to 69.06%) and ssGBLUP methods (66.82% to 73.70%) was significantly higher than that of ABLUP (36.73% to 41.25%). For the ssGBLUP method is significantly (29% similar to 33%) higher than that with ABLUP, and which is slightly (4% similar to 14%) higher than that of GBLUP. The ssGBLUP will be as an superiors method for using genomic selection of fleece traits in Inner Mongolia Cashmere goats.
BackgroundObservational studies have preliminarily revealed an association between smoking and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). However, little is known about the causal relationship and shared genetic architecture between the two. This study aims to explore their common genetic correlations by leveraging genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of smoking behavior-specifically, smoking initiation (SI), never smoking (NS), ever smoking (ES), cigarettes smoked per day (CPD), age of smoking initiation(ASI) and GERD.MethodsFirstly, we conducted global cross-trait genetic correlation analysis and heritability estimation from summary statistics (HESS) to explore the genetic correlation between smoking behavior and GERD. Then, a joint cross-trait meta-analysis was performed to identify shared "pleiotropic SNPs" between smoking behavior and GERD, followed by co-localization analysis. Additionally, multi-marker analyses using annotation (MAGMA) were employed to explore the degree of enrichment of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) heritability in specific tissues, and summary data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR) was further utilized to investigate potential functional genes. Finally, Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis was conducted to explore the causal relationship between the smoking behavior and GERD.ResultsConsistent genetic correlations were observed through global and local genetic correlation analyses, wherein SI, ES, and CPD showed significantly positive genetic correlations with GERD, while NS and ASI showed significantly negative correlations. HESS analysis also identified multiple significantly associated loci between them. Furthermore, three novel "pleiotropic SNPs" (rs4382592, rs200968, rs1510719) were identified through cross-trait meta-analysis and co-localization analysis to exist between SI, NS, ES, ASI, and GERD, mapping the genes MED27, HIST1H2BO, MAML3 as new pleiotropic genes between SI, NS, ES, ASI, and GERD. Moreover, both smoking behavior and GERD were found to be co-enriched in multiple brain tissues, with GMPPB, RNF123, and RBM6 identified as potential functional genes co-enriched in Cerebellar Hemisphere, Cerebellum, Cortex/Nucleus accumbens in SI and GERD, and SUOX identified in Caudate nucleus, Cerebellum, Cortex in NS and GERD. Lastly, consistent causal relationships were found through MR analysis, indicating that SI, ES, and CPD increase the risk of GERD, while NS and higher ASI decrease the risk.ConclusionWe identified genetic loci associated with smoking behavior and GERD, as well as brain tissue sites of shared enrichment, prioritizing three new pleiotropic genes and four new functional genes. Finally, the causal relationship between smoking behavior and GERD was demonstrated, providing insights for early prevention strategies for GERD.
Comprehensive characterizations of genetic diversity and demographic models of ethnolinguistically diverse Chinese populations are essential for elucidating their forensic characteristics and evolutionary past. We developed a 114-plex NGS InDel panel to genotype 114 genome-wide markers and investigated the genetic structures of Zhuang, Hui, Miao, Li, Tibetan, Yi, and Mongolian populations, encompassing five language families. This panel demonstrated robust performance, with exceptional potential for forensic individual identification and paternity testing, evidenced by the combined power of discrimination for 77 autosomal InDels (ranged from 1-3.6400 x 10-30 to 1-3.5713 x 10-32) and the combined power of exclusion (ranged from 1-2.1863 x 10-6 to 1-2.1261 x 10-7). The cumulative mean exclusion chance for 32 X-chromosomal InDels varied between 0.99996 and 0.99999 for trios and 0.99760 to 0.99898 for duos. We also analyzed genetic similarities and differences between these populations and 27 global populations, revealing distinct clusters among African, South Asian, East Asian, and European groups, with a close genetic affinity to East Asians. Notably, we identified geography-related genetic substructures: Inner Mongolia Mongolians and Gansu Huis formed a northern branch, Tibetans and Yis from Sichuan constituted a highland branch, and Guangxi Zhuangs exhibited close ties with Hainan Lis and Guangxi Miaos in the southern branch. Additionally, many InDels proved to be ancestry-informative markers for biogeographic ancestry inference. Collectively, these findings underscore the utility of the 114-plex NGS InDel panel as a complementary tool for forensic investigations and as a source of insights into the genetic architecture of ethnolinguistically distinct Chinese populations.
Background Calmodulins (CaMs)/CaM-like proteins (CMLs) are crucial Ca2+-binding sensors that can decode and transduce Ca(2+ )signals during plant development and in response to various stimuli. The CaM/CML gene family has been characterized in many plant species, but this family has not yet been characterized and analyzed in peanut, especially for its functions in response to Ralstonia solanacearum. In this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis to analyze the CaM/CML genes and their functions in resistance to R. solanacearum. Results Here, 67, 72, and 214 CaM/CML genes were identified from Arachis duranensis, Arachis ipaensis, and Arachis hypogaea, respectively. The genes were divided into nine subgroups (Groups I-IX) with relatively conserved exon-intron structures and motif compositions. Gene duplication, which included whole-genome duplication, tandem repeats, scattered repeats, and unconnected repeats, produced approximately 81 pairs of homologous genes in the AhCaM/CML gene family. Allopolyploidization was the main reason for the greater number of AhCaM/CML members. The nonsynonymous (Ka) versus synonymous (Ks) substitution rates (less than 1.0) suggested that all homologous pairs underwent intensive purifying selection pressure during evolution. AhCML69 was constitutively expressed in different tissues of peanut plants and was involved in the response to R. solanacearum infection. The AhCML69 protein was localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Transient overexpression of AhCML69 in tobacco leaves increased resistance to R. solanacearum infection and induced the expression of defense-related genes, suggesting that AhCML69 is a positive regulator of disease resistance. Conclusions This study provides the first comprehensive analysis of the AhCaM/CML gene family and potential genetic resources for the molecular design and breeding of peanut bacterial wilt resistance.
Sweetpotato (Ipomoea batatas L.), an important food and industrial crop in the world, has a highly heterozygous hexaploid genome, making the development of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers challenging. Identifying SNP loci and developing practical SNP markers are crucial for genomic and genetic research on sweetpotato. A restriction site-associated DNA sequencing analysis of 60 sweetpotato accessions in this study yielded about 7.97 million SNPs. Notably, 954 candidate SNPs were obtained from 21,681 high-quality SNPs. Based on their stability and polymorphism, 274 kompetitive allele specific PCR (KASP) markers were then developed and uniformly distributed on chromosomes. The 274 KASP markers were used to genotype 93 sweetpotato accessions to evaluate their utility for assessing germplasm and analyzing genetic diversity and population structures. These markers had respective mean values of 0.24, 0.34, 0.31, and 0.25 for minor allele frequency, heterozygosity, gene diversity, and polymorphic information content (PIC). Their genetic pedigree led to the division of all accessions into three primary clusters, which were found to be both interrelated and independent. Finally, 74 KASP markers with PIC values greater than 0.35 were selected as core markers. These markers were used to construct the DNA fingerprints of 93 sweetpotato accessions and were able to differentiate between all accessions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt at the development and application of KASP markers in sweetpotato. However, due to sweetpotato's polyploidy, heterozygosity and the complex genome, the KASP marker conversion rate in this study was relatively low. To improve the KASP marker conversion rate, and accuracies in SNP discovery and marker validation, further studies including more accessions from underrepresented regions are needed in sweetpotato.
Alfalfa, an essential forage crop known for its high yield, nutritional value, and strong adaptability, has been widely cultivated worldwide. The yield and quality of alfalfa are frequently jeopardized due to environmental degradation. Lignin, a constituent of the cell wall, enhances plant resistance to abiotic stress, which often causes osmotic stress in plant cells. However, how lignin responds to osmotic stress in leaves remains unclear. This study explored the effects of osmotic stress on lignin accumulation and the contents of intermediate metabolites involved in lignin synthesis in alfalfa leaves. Osmotic stress caused an increase in lignin accumulation and the alteration of core enzyme activities and gene expression in the phenylpropanoid pathway. We identified five hub genes (CSE, CCR, CADa, CADb, and POD) and thirty edge genes (including WRKYs, MYBs, and UBPs) by integrating transcriptome and metabolome analyses. In addition, ABA and ethylene signaling induced by osmotic stress regulated lignin biosynthesis in a contradictory way. These findings contribute to a new theoretical foundation for the breeding of high-quality and resistant alfalfa varieties.
BackgroundIt is known that the neurodevelopmental disorder associated gene, Satb2, plays important roles in determining the upper layer neuron specification. However, it is not well known how this gene regulates other neocortical regions during the development. It is also lack of comprehensive delineation of its spatially regulatory pathways in neocortical development.ResultsIn this work, we utilized spatial transcriptomics and immuno-staining to systematically investigate the region-specific gene regulation of Satb2 by comparing the Satb2+/+ and Satb2-/- mice at embryonic stages, including the ventricle zone (VZ) or subventricle zone (SVZ), intermediate zone (IZ) and cortical plate (CP) respectively. The staining result reveals that these three regions become moderately or significantly thinner in the Satb2-/- mice. In the cellular level, the cell number increases in the VZ/SVZ, whereas the cell number decreases in the CP. The spatial transcriptomics data show that many important genes and relevant pathways are dysregulated in Satb2-/- mice in a region-specific manner. In the VZ/SVZ, the key genes involved in neural precursor cell proliferation, including the intermediate progenitor marker Tbr2 and the lactate production related gene Ldha, are up-regulated in Satb2-/- mice. In the IZ, the key genes in regulating neuronal differentiation and migration, such as Rnd2, exhibit ectopic expressions in the Satb2-/- mice. In the CP, the lineage-specific genes, Tbr1 and Bcl11b, are abnormally expressed. The neuropeptide related gene Npy is down-regulated in Satb2-/- mice. Finally, we validated the abnormal expressions of key regulators by using immunofluorescence or qPCR.ConclusionsIn summary, our work provides insights on the region-specific genes and pathways which are regulated by Satb2 in neocortical development.
Background The pituitary directly regulates the reproductive process through follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). Transcriptomic research on the pituitaries of ewes with different FecB (fecundity Booroola) genotypes has shown that some key genes and lncRNAs play an important role in pituitary function and sheep fecundity. Our previous study found that ewes with FecB + + genotypes (without FecB mutation) still had individuals with more than one offspring per birth. It is hoped to analyze this phenomenon from the perspective of the pituitary transcriptome. Results The 12 Small Tail Han Sheep were equally divided into polytocous sheep in the follicular phase (PF), polytocous sheep in the luteal phase (PL), monotocous sheep in the follicular phase (MF), and monotocous sheep in the luteal phase (ML). Pituitary tissues were collected after estrus synchronous treatment for transcriptomic analysis. A total of 384 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (182 in PF vs. MF and 202 in PL vs. ML) and 844 differentially expressed lncRNAs (DELs) (427 in PF vs. MF and 417 in PL vs. ML) were obtained from the polytocous-monotocous comparison groups in the two phases. Functional enrichment analysis showed that the DEGs in the two phases were enriched in signaling pathways known to play an important role in sheep fecundity, such as calcium ion binding and cAMP signaling pathways. A total of 1322 target relationship pairs (551 pairs in PF vs. MF and 771 pairs in PL vs. ML) were obtained for the target genes prediction of DELs, of which 29 DEL-DEG target relationship pairs (nine pairs in PF vs. MF and twenty pairs in PL vs. ML). In addition, the competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) networks were constructed to explore the regulatory relationships of DEGs, and some important regulatory relationship pairs were obtained. Conclusion According to the analysis results, we hypothesized that the pituitary first receives steroid hormone signals from the ovary and uterus and that VAV3 (Vav Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factor 3), GABRG1 (Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid A Receptor, Gamma 1), and FNDC1 (Fibronectin Type III Domain Containing 1) played an important role in this process. Subsequently, the reproductive process was regulated by gonadotropins, and IGFBP1 (Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Protein 1) was directly involved in this process, ultimately affecting litter size. In addition, TGIF1 (Transforming Growth Factor-Beta-Induced Factor 1) and TMEFF2 (Transmembrane Protein With EGF Like And Two Follistatin Like Domains 2) compensated for the effect of the FecB mutation and function by acting on TGF-beta/SMAD signaling pathway, an important pathway for sheep reproduction. These results provided a reference for understanding the mechanism of multiple births in Small Tail Han Sheep without FecB mutation.
BackgroundPigs serve as a crucial source of protein in the human diet and play a fundamental role in ensuring food security. However, infectious diseases caused by bacteria or viruses are a major threat to effective global pig farming, jeopardizing human health. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are a mixture of immune cells that play crucial roles in immunity and disease resistance in pigs. Previous studies on the gene expression regulation patterns of PBMCs have concentrated on a single immune stimulus or immune cell subpopulation, which has limited our comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms of the pig immune response.ResultsHere, we integrated and re-analyzed RNA-seq data published online for porcine PBMC stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), polyinosinic acid (PolyI:C), and various unknown microorganisms (EM). The results revealed that gene expression and its functional characterization are highly specific to the pathogen, identifying 603, 254, and 882 pathogen-specific genes and 38 shared genes, respectively. Notably, LPS and PolyI:C stimulation directly triggered inflammatory and immune-response pathways, while exposure to mixed microbes (EM) enhanced metabolic processes. These pathogen-specific genes were enriched in immune trait-associated quantitative trait loci (QTL) and eGenes in porcine immune tissues and were implicated in specific cell types. Furthermore, we discussed the roles of eQTLs rs3473322705 and rs1109431654 in regulating pathogen- and cell-specific genes CD300A and CD93, using cellular experiments. Additionally, by integrating genome-wide association studies datasets from 33 complex traits and diseases in humans, we found that pathogen-specific genes were significantly enriched for immune traits and metabolic diseases.ConclusionsWe systematically analyzed the gene expression profiles of the three stimulations and demonstrated pathogen-specific and cell-specific gene regulation across different stimulations in porcine PBMCs. These findings enhance our understanding of shared and distinct regulatory mechanisms of genetic variants in pig immune traits.
Background Rose myrtle (Rhodomyrtus tomentosa (Ait.) Hassk), is an evergreen shrub species belonging to the family Myrtaceae, which is enriched with bioactive volatiles (alpha-pinene and beta-caryophyllene) with medicinal and industrial applications. However, the mechanism underlying the volatile accumulation in the rose myrtle is still unclear. Results Here, we present a chromosome-level genomic assembly of rose myrtle (genome size = 466 Mb, scaffold N50 = 43.7 Mb) with 35,554 protein-coding genes predicted. Through comparative genomic analysis, we found that gene expansion and duplication had a potential contribution to the accumulation of volatile substances. We proposed that the action of positive selection was significantly involved in volatile accumulation. We identified 43 TPS genes in R. tomentosa. Further transcriptomic and TPS gene family analyses demonstrated that the distinct gene subgroups of TPS may contribute greatly to the biosynthesis and accumulation of different volatiles in the Myrtle family of shrubs and trees. The results suggested that the diversity of TPS-a subgroups led to the accumulation of special sesquiterpenes in different plants of the Myrtaceae family. Conclusions The high quality chromosome-level rose myrtle genome and the comparative analysis of TPS gene family open new avenues for obtaining a higher commercial value of essential oils in medical plants.
Oxidative stress (OS) plays an essential role in chronic diseases such as colorectal cancer (CRC). In this study, we aimed to explore the relation between oxidative stress-related genes and CRC prognosis and their involvement in the immune microenvironment. Totally 101 OS-related genes were selected from the MsigDB database. Then, univariate Cox regression was used to explore the prognostic value of the selected genes correlated with the CRC patient survival in the TCGA database. A total of 9 prognostic OS-related genes in CRC were identified. Based on consensus clustering, CRC patients were then categorized into two molecular subtypes. A prognostic risk model containing 8 genes was established using Lasso regression, and CRC patients were divided into high or low-risk groups based on the median risk scores. The predictive value of the 8 genes in CRC prognosis was validated using ROC curves, which indicate that CTNNB1, STK25, RNF112, SFPQ, MMP3, and NOL3 were promising prognostic biomarkers in CRC. Furthermore, the immune cell infiltration levels in different risk groups or CRC subtypes were analyzed. We found that the high-risk or C1 subtype had immunosuppressive microenvironment, which might explain the unfavorable prognosis in the two groups of CRC patients. Additionally, functional experiments were conducted to investigate the effects of OS-related genes on CRC cell proliferation, stemness, and apoptosis. We found that CTNNB1, HSPB1, MMP3, and NOL3 were upregulated in CRC tissues and cells. Knockdown of CTNNB1, HSPB1, MMP3, and NOL3 significantly suppressed CRC cell proliferation, stemness and facilitated CRC cell apoptosis. In conclusion, we established prognostic CRC subtypes and an eight-gene risk model, which may provide novel prognostic indicators and benefit the design of individualized therapeutic strategies for CRC patients.
Background Haloxylon ammodendron holds significance as an ecological plant, showcasing remarkable adaptability to desert conditions, halophytic environments, and sand fixation. With its potential for carbon sequestration, it emerges as a promising candidate for environmental sustainability. Furthermore, it serves as a valuable C4 plant model, offering insights into the genetic foundations of extreme drought tolerance. Despite the availability of plastid and nuclear genomes, the absence of a mitochondrial genome (mitogenome or mtDNA) hinders a comprehensive understanding of its its mtDNA structure, organization, and phylogenetic implications. Results In the present study, the mitochondrial genome of H. ammodendron was assembled and annotated, resulting in a multi-chromosomal configuration with two circular chromosomes. The mtDNA measured 210,149 bp in length and contained 31 protein-coding genes, 18 tRNA and three rRNA. Our analysis identified a total of 66 simple sequence repeats along with 27 tandem repeats, 312 forward repeats, and 303 palindromic repeats were found. Notably, 17 sequence fragments displayed homology between the mtDNA and chloroplast genome (cpDNA), spanning 5233 bp, accounting for 2.49% of the total mitogenome size. Additionally, we predicted 337 RNA editing sites, all of the C-to-U conversion type. Phylogenetic inference confidently placed H. ammodendron in the Amaranthacea family and its close relative, Suaeda glacum. Conclusions H. ammodendron mtDNA showed a multi-chromosomal structure with two fully circularized molecules. This newly characterized mtDNA represents a valuable resource for gaining insights into the basis of mtDNA structure variation within Caryophyllales and the evolution of land plants, contributing to their identification, and classification.
The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) family is one of the most widely studied transcription factor families in plants; HSFs can participate in the response to various stressors, such as heat stress, high salt, and drought stress. Based on garlic transcriptome data, we screened and identified 22 garlic HSFs. The HSF proteins of garlic and Arabidopsis can be divided into three (A, B, C) subfamilies. The phylogenetic relationship, chromosome localization, sequence characteristics, conserved motifs, and promoter analysis of the HSF family were analyzed through bioinformatics methods. RT-qPCR analysis showed that the nine selected genes had different degrees of response to heat stress. In addition, we isolated and identified a class B HSF gene, AsHSFB1, from garlic variety 'Xusuan No.6'. Subsequently, the AsHSFB1 gene was overexpressed in Arabidopsis thaliana. Under heat stress, the germination rate and growth of wild-type plants were better than that of transgenic plants. Moreover, after heat treatment, the contents of peroxidase, catalase, and chlorophyll a and b of transgenic plants were lower, but the contents of malondialdehyde (MDA) and leaf conductivity were higher. Nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) staining showed that the stained area of transgenic plant leaves was larger than that of the wild type. Further studies showed that AsHSFB1 overexpression inhibited the expression of related reverse resistance genes. These results indicate that AsHSFB1 might play a negative regulatory role in garlic resistance under high stress. Altogether, these findings provide valuable data for revealing the function of HSF genes and lay a foundation for the subsequent selection of heat-resistant garlic varieties.
Resveratrol has been reported to promote immunity and decrease oxidative stress, but which demonstrates biphasic effects relied on the use concentration. In this study, the effects of diet supplement with a relative high concentration of resveratrol (0.32 mg/kg) on metabolism, antioxidation and apoptosis of liver were investigated in Siberian sturgeon. The results showed that resveratrol significantly increased the lipid synthesis and the apoptosis, but did not either activate the antioxidant NRF2/KEAP1 pathway or enhance the antioxidant enzyme activity. Transcriptome analysis revealed significant changes in regulatory pathways related to glycolipid, including PPAR signaling pathway, Insulin signaling pathway, Fatty acid biosynthesis, and Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis. In addition, resveratrol significantly increased the lipid synthesis genes (acc alpha and fas), fatty acid transport gene (fatp 6) and gluconeogenesis gene (gck), but decreased the survival-promoting genes (gadd45 beta and igf 1). These findings highlight a significant effect of resveratrol on glycolipid metabolism in Siberian sturgeon. Moreover, this study also demonstrated that 0.32 mg/kg resveratrol has physiological toxicity to the liver of Siberian sturgeon, indicating that this dose is too high for Siberian sturgeon. Thus, our study provides a valuable insight for future research and application of resveratrol in fish.
Background In aquaculture, sturgeons are generally maintained in the confined spaces, which not only hinders sturgeon movement, but also threatens their flesh quality that seriously concerned by aquaculture industry. As a typical antioxidant, resveratrol can improve the flesh quality of livestock and poultry. However, the mechanism of resveratrol's effect on the muscle of Siberian sturgeon is still unclear. Results In this study, the dietary resveratrol increased the myofiber diameter, the content of the amino acids, antioxidant capacity markers (CAT, LDH and SOD) levels and the expression levels of mTORC1 and MYH9 in muscle of Siberian sturgeon. Further transcriptome analysis displayed that ROS production-related pathways ("Oxidative phosphorylation" and "Chemical carcinogenes-reactive oxygen species") were enriched in KEGG analysis, and the expression levels of genes related to the production of ROS (COX4, COX6A, ATPeF1A, etc.) in mitochondria were significantly down-regulated, while the expression levels of genes related to scavenging ROS (SOD1) were up-regulated. Conclusions In summary, this study reveals that resveratrol may promote the flesh quality of Siberian sturgeon probably by enhancing myofiber growth, nutritional value and the antioxidant capacity of muscle, which has certain reference significance for the development of a new type of feed for Siberian sturgeon.
BackgroundIn plants, Cytochrome P450 (CYP450) constitutes the largest family of metabolic enzymes and plays a crucial role in various physiological processes, including plant growth and development. Eggplants are well-known for their peel's high concentration of anthocyanin compounds that provide significant health benefits to humans. The accumulation of anthocyanins in eggplant peels is an important process during growth and development. Therefore, it is essential to identify the CYP450 genes in eggplant (SmCYPs) and analyze their expression profiles during the period of anthocyanin accumulation in the peel.ResultsA total of 180 SmCYPs were identified in the eggplant genome and classified into eight subfamilies based on phylogenetic analysis. These SmCYPs exhibited highly conserved gene structure (exon/intron) and protein motifs, especially within their respective subgroup. Sixteen pairs of genes with collinearity were identified through gene duplication analysis. Promoter cis-acting element analysis revealed that SmCYPs are involved in various responses, including growth and development, stress responsiveness, and light responsiveness. Transcriptome data analysis revealed that all SmCYPs were expressed in various eggplant tissues, such as roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and fruits; with diverse expression patterns among members. The expression patterns of SmCYPs in eggplant peel also exhibited diversity during different stages of anthocyanin accumulation. qRT-PCR analysis demonstrated similar expression patterns for 15 selected SmCYPs as observed in the transcriptome data. Metabolomics analysis further suggested that SmCYPs are involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and metabolic pathways related to flavonoid and flavone/flavonol biosynthesis. Notably, three specific SmCYPs (SmCYP73A1/75A/98A1) play a significant role in flavonoid biosynthesis, particularly in anthocyanin synthesis in eggplant.ConclusionGenome-wide identification, phylogenetic analysis, expression profile analysis, and exploration of metabolic pathways related to SmCYPs provide valuable insights into the roles of these genes in anthocyanin accumulation in various tissues and organs, including eggplant peel. The findings from this study lay a foundation for the functional analysis of SmCYPs involvement in anthocyanin accumulation in eggplant peel, providing a molecular basis for breeders to cultivate novel varieties of eggplants with high levels of anthocyanin content.
BackgroundCRISPR-Cas systems require a protospacer adjacent motif (PAM), which plays an essential role in self/non-self discrimination in their natural context, to cleave DNA for genome editing. Unfortunately, common genetic variation is distributed throughout genomes, which can block recognition of target sites by Cas proteins. However, little information is available about the distribution of editing sites in model organisms and how often common variation overlaps with those PAM sites.ResultsHerein, we characterized six representative Cas proteins (Cas9, Cas12a, Cas12b, Cas12i, Cas12j and Cas12l) genomic editing sites in ten model organisms (yeast, flatworms, flies, zebrafish, mice, humans, rice, maize, Arabidopsis and tomato). We demonstrated that there were more than 34 editing sites per kilobase on average in these genomes. In each genome, 91.69-99.83% and 95.4-99.73% of genes had at least one unique editing site in exon and promoter, respectively. Depending on publicly available genomic diversity data, we identified the variations (SNPs and InDels) in editing sites in humans and rice, indicating the risk in the application of CRISPR/Cas technology. Finally, using CCR5 and BCL11A as examples, we revealed variation site was a factor that must be considered when designing sgRNA.ConclusionsOur findings not only revealed the distribution characteristics of editing sites of six representative Cas proteins in ten model organism genomes but also shed light on the adverse effect of variation sites on target site recognition. Our current work will serve as a reminder of the risks of CRISPR application.
BackgroundThe heat shock transcription factor (Hsf) is a crucial regulator of plant stress resistance, playing a key role in plant stress response, growth, and development regulation. ResultsIn this study, we utilized bioinformatics tools to screen 25 VbHsf members, which were named VbHsf1-VbHsf25. We used bioinformatics methods to analyze the sequence structure, physicochemical properties, conserved motifs, phylogenetic evolution, chromosome localization, promoter cis-acting elements, collinearity, and gene expression of Hsf heat shock transcription factor family members under low-temperature stress. The results revealed that the majority of the Hsf genes contained motif1, motif2, and motif3, signifying that these three motifs were highly conserved in the Hsf protein sequence of Verbena bonariensis. Although there were some variations in motif deletion among the members, the domain remained highly conserved. The theoretical isoelectric point ranged from 4.17 to 9.71, with 21 members being unstable proteins and the remainder being stable proteins. Subcellular localization predictions indicated that all members were located in the nucleus. Phylogenetic analysis of the Hsf gene family in V. bonariensis and Arabidopsis thaliana revealed that the Hsf gene family of V. bonariensis could be categorized into three groups, with group A comprising 17 members and group C having at least two members. Among the 25 Hsf members, there were 1-3 exons located on seven chromosome fragments, which were unevenly distributed. Collinearity analysis demonstrated the presence of seven pairs of homologous genes in the VbHsf gene family. The Ka/Ks ratios were less than one, indicating that the VbHsf gene underwent purification selection pressure. Additionally, nine genes in V. bonariensis were found to have collinearity with A. thaliana. Promoter analysis revealed that the promoters of all VbHsf genes contained various types of cis-acting elements related to hormones and stress. Based on RNA-seq data, qRT-PCR analysis of six highly expressed genes was performed, and it was found that VbHsf5, VbHsf14, VbHsf17, VbHsf18, VbHsf20 and VbHsf21 genes were highly expressed at 12 h of low-temperature treatment, and the expression decreased after 24 h, among which VbHsf14 was up-regulated at 12 h of low-temperature by 70-fold. ConclusionsOur study may help reveal the important roles of Hsf in plant development and show insight for the further molecular breeding of V. bonariensis.
Background Elaeocarpus spp. stem blight, caused by Pseudocryphonectria elaeocarpicola, is a destructive disease, which will significantly reduce the productivity and longevity of Elaeocarpus spp. plants, especially in the Guangdong Province of China. However, few information is available for P. elaeocarpicola. To unravel the potential adaptation mechanism of stem adaptation, the whole genome of P. elaeocarpicola was sequenced by using the DNBSEQ and PacBio platforms. ResultsP . elaeocarpicola harbors 44.49 Mb genome with 10,894 predicted coding genes. Genome analysis revealed that the P. elaeocarpicola genome encodes a plethora of pathogenicity-related genes. Analysis of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) revealed a rich variety of enzymes participated in plant cell wall degradation, which could effectively degrade cellulose, hemicellulose and xyloglucans in the plant cell wall and promote the invasion of the host plant. There are 213 CAZyme families found in P. elaeocarpicola, among which glycoside hydrolase (GH) family has the largest number, far exceeding other tested fungi by 53%. Besides, P. elaeocarpicola has twice as many genes encoding chitin and cellulose degradation as Cryphonectria parasitica, which belong to the same family. The predicted typical secreted proteins of P. elaeocarpicola are numerous and functional, including many known virulence effector factors, indicating that P. elaeocarpicola has great potential to secrete virulence effectors to promote pathogenicity on host plants. AntiSMASH revealed that the genome encoded 61 secondary metabolic gene clusters including 86 secondary metabolic core genes which was much higher than C. parasitica (49). Among them, two gene cluster of P. elaeocarpicola, cluster12 and cluster52 showed 100% similarity with the mycotoxins synthesis clusters from Aspergillus steynii and Alternaria alternata, respectively. In addition, we annotated cytochrome P450 related enzymes, transporters, and transcription factors in P. elaeocarpicola, which are important virulence determinants of pathogenic fungi. Conclusions Taken together, our study represents the first genome assembly for P. elaeocarpicola and reveals the key virulence factors in the pathogenic process of P. elaeocarpicola, which will promote our understanding of its pathogenic mechanism. The acquired knowledge lays a foundation for further exploration of molecular interactions with the host and provide target for management strategies in future research.
Background Peritoneal carcinomatosis was the main reason leading to gastric cancer (GC)-related death. We aimed to explore the roles of dysregulated microRNAs (miRNAs) and related immune regulation activities in GC-associated malignant ascites.Methods GSE126399 were downloaded from GEO database. Differentially expressed miRNAs in GC ascites samples was firstly screened, and critical miRNAs were further investigated by LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator) logistic regression and random forest (RF) algorithm. Receiver operating characteristic of critical miRNAs was also constructed. Moreover, functional analysis, immune cell infiltration associated with differentially expressed mRNAs were further analyzed. After selecting key modules by weighted gene co-expression network analysis, mRNAs related with survival performance and transcription factor (TF)-miRNA-mRNA network were constructed.Results Hsa-miR-181b-5p was confirmed as critical differentially expressed miRNAs in GC ascites. Then, the tumor samples were divided into high- and low- expression groups divided by mean expression levels of hsa-miR-181b-5p, and subjects with high hsa-miR-181b-5p levels had better survival outcomes. In total, 197 differentially expressed mRNAs associated with hsa-miR-181b-5p levels were obtained, and these mRNAs were mainly enriched in muscle activity and vascular smooth muscle contraction. Hsa-miR-181b-5 was positively related with activated CD4 T cells and negatively related with eosinophil. 17 mRNAs were selected as mRNAs significantly related with prognosis of GC, such as PDK4 and RAMP1. Finally, 75 TF-miRNA-mRNA relationships were obtained, including 15 TFs, hsa-miR-181b-5p, and five mRNAs.Conclusion Our data suggest that the differentially expressed hsa-miR-181b-5p in ascites samples of GC patients may be a valuable prognostic marker and a potential target for therapeutic intervention, which should be validated in the near future.
Background Transcription factors (TFs) of plant-specific SHORT INTERNODES (SHI) family play a significant role in regulating development and metabolism in plants. In Artemisia annua, various TFs from different families have been discovered to regulate the accumulation of artemisinin. However, specific members of the SHI family in A. annua (AaSHIs) have not been identified to regulate the biosynthesis of artemisinin. Results We found five AaSHI genes (AaSHI1 to AaSHI5) in the A. annua genome. The expression levels of AaSHI1, AaSHI2, AaSHI3 and AaSHI4 genes were higher in trichomes and young leaves, also induced by light and decreased when the plants were subjected to dark treatment. The expression pattern of these four AaSHI genes was consistent with the expression pattern of four structural genes of artemisinin biosynthesis and their specific regulatory factors. Dual-luciferase reporter assays, yeast one-hybrid assays, and transient transformation in A. annua provided the evidence that AaSHI1 could directly bind to the promoters of structural genes AaADS and AaCYP71AV1, and positively regulate their expressions. This study has presented candidate genes, with AaSHI1 in particular, that can be considered for the metabolic engineering of artemisinin biosynthesis in A. annua. Conclusions Overall, a genome-wide analysis of the AaSHI TF family of A. annua was conducted. Five AaSHIs were identified in A. annua genome. Among the identified AaSHIs, AaSHI1 was found to be localized to the nucleus and activate the expression of structural genes of artemisinin biosynthesis including AaADS and AaCYP71AV1. These results indicated that AaSHI1 had positive roles in modulating artemisinin biosynthesis, providing candidate genes for obtaining high-quality new A. annua germplasms.
Background'Taishuu' has a crisp texture, abundant juice, and sweet flavor with hints of cantaloupe. The availability of mitochondrial genome data of Diospyros species is far from the known number of species. ResultsThe sequencing data were assembled into a closed circular mitochondrial chromosome with a 421,308 bp length and a 45.79% GC content. The mitochondrial genome comprised 40 protein-coding, 24 tRNA, and three rRNA genes. The most common codons for arginine (Arg), proline (Pro), glycine (Gly), tryptophan (Trp), valine (Val), alanine (Ala), and leucine (Leu) were AGA, CCA, GGA, UGG, GUA, GCA, and CUA, respectively. The start codon for cox1 and nad4L protein-coding genes was ACG (ATG), whereas the remaining protein-coding genes started with ATG. There are four types of stop codons: CGA, TAA, TAG, and TGA, with TAA being the most frequently used stop codon (45.24%). In the D. kaki Thunb. 'Taishuu' mitochondrial genome, a total of 645 repeat sequences were identified, including 125 SSRs, 7 tandem repeats, and 513 dispersed repeats. Collinearity analysis revealed a close relationship between D. kaki Thunb. 'Taishuu' and Diospyros oleifera, with conserved homologous gene fragments shared among these species in large regions of the mitochondrial genome. The protein-coding genes ccmB and nad4L were observed to undergo positive selection. Analysis of homologous sequences between chloroplasts and mitochondria identified 28 homologous segments, with a total length of 24,075 bp, accounting for 5.71% of the mitochondrial genome. These homologous segments contain 8 annotated genes, including 6 tRNA genes and 2 protein-coding genes (rrn18 and ccmC). There are 23 homologous genes between chloroplasts and nuclei. Mitochondria, chloroplasts, and nuclei share two homologous genes, which are trnV-GAC and trnW-CCA. ConclusionIn conclusion, a high-quality chromosome-level draft genome for D. kaki was generated in this study, which will contribute to further studies of major economic traits in the genus Diospyros.
Background The growth-regulating factor-interacting factor (GIF) gene family plays a vital role in regulating plant growth and development, particularly in controlling leaf, seed, and root meristem homeostasis. However, the regulatory mechanism of heteromorphic leaves by GIF genes in Populus euphratica as an important adaptative trait of heteromorphic leaves in response to desert environment remains unknown. Results This study aimed to identify and characterize the GIF genes in P. euphratica and other five Salicaceae species to investigate their role in regulating heteromorphic leaf development. A total of 27 GIF genes were identified and characterized across six Salicaceae species (P. euphratica, Populus pruinose, Populus deltoides, Populus trichocarpa, Salix sinopurpurea, and Salix suchowensis) at the genome-wide level. Comparative genomic analysis among these species suggested that the expansion of GIFs may be derived from the specific Salicaceae whole-genome duplication event after their divergence from Arabidopsis thaliana. Furthermore, the expression data of PeGIFs in heteromorphic leaves, combined with functional information on GIF genes in Arabidopsis, indicated the role of PeGIFs in regulating the leaf development of P. euphratica, especially PeGIFs containing several cis-acting elements associated with plant growth and development. By heterologous expression of the PeGIF3 gene in wild-type plants (Col-0) and atgif1 mutant of A. thaliana, a significant difference in leaf expansion along the medial-lateral axis, and an increased number of leaf cells, were observed between the overexpressed plants and the wild type. Conclusion PeGIF3 enhances leaf cell proliferation, thereby resulting in the expansion of the central-lateral region of the leaf. The findings not only provide global insights into the evolutionary features of Salicaceae GIFs but also reveal the regulatory mechanism of PeGIF3 in heteromorphic leaves of P. euphratica.
Background Larval settlement and metamorphosis represent critical events in the life history of marine benthic animals. Myoinhibitory peptide (MIP) plays a pivotal role in larval settlement of marine invertebrates. However, the molecular mechanisms of MIP involved in this process are not well understood. Results In this study, we evaluated the effects of thirteen MIP mature peptides on triggering the larval settlement of Urechis unicinctus (Xenopneusta, Urechidae), and determined that MIP2 was the principal neuropeptide. Transcriptomic analysis was employed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the MIP2-treated larvae and normal early-segmentation larvae. Both cAMP and calcium signaling pathways were enriched in the DEGs of the MIP2-treated larvae, and two neuropeptide receptor genes (Spr, Fmrfar) were up-regulated in the MIP2-treated larvae. The activation of the SPR-cAMP pathway by MIP2 was experimentally validated in HEK293T cells. Furthermore, fourteen cilia-related genes, including Tctex1d2, Cfap45, Ift43, Ift74, Ift22, Cav1 and Mns1, etc. exhibited down-regulated expression in the MIP2-treated larvae. Whole-mount in situ hybridization identified two selected ciliary genes, Tctex1d2 and Cfap45, were specially expressed in circumoral ciliary cells of the early-segmentation larvae. Knocking down Tctex1d2 mRNA levels by in vivo RNA interference significantly increased the larval settlement rate. Conclusion Our findings suggest that MIP2 inhibits the function of the cilia-related genes, such as Tctex1d2, through the SPR-cAMP-PKA pathway, thereby inducing larval settlement in U. unicinctus. The study contributes important data to the understanding of neuropeptide regulation in larval settlement.
Background The disease caused by Riemerella anatipestifer (R. anatipestifer, RA) results in large economic losses to the global duck industry every year. Serovar-related genomic variation, such as the O-antigen and capsular polysaccharide (CPS) gene clusters, has been widely used for serotyping in many gram-negative bacteria. RA has been classified into at least 21 serovars based on slide agglutination, but the molecular basis of serotyping is unknown. In this study, we performed a pan-genome-wide association study (Pan-GWAS) to identify the genetic loci associated with RA serovars.Results The results revealed a significant association between the putative CPS synthesis gene locus and the serological phenotype. Further characterization of the CPS gene clusters in 11 representative serovar strains indicated that they were highly diverse and serovar-specific. The CPS gene cluster contained the key genes wzx and wzy, which are involved in the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway of CPS synthesis. Similar CPS loci have been found in some other species within the family Weeksellaceae. We have also shown that deletion of the wzy gene in RA results in capsular defects and cross-agglutination.Conclusions This study indicates that the CPS synthesis gene cluster of R. anatipestifer is a serotype-specific genetic locus. Importantly, our finding provides a new perspective for the systematic analysis of the genetic basis of the R anatipestifer serovars and a potential target for establishing a complete molecular serotyping scheme.
Recent studies on co-transformation of the growth regulator, TaGRF4-GIF1 chimera (Growth Regulating Factor 4-GRF Interacting Factor 1), in cultivated wheat varieties (Triticum aestivum), showed improved regeneration efficiency, marking a significant breakthrough. Here, a simple and reproducible protocol using the GRF4-GIF1 chimera was established and tested in the medicinal orchid Dendrobium catenatum, a monocot orchid species. TaGRF4-GIF1 from T. aestivum and DcGRF4-GIF1 from D. catenatum were reconstructed, with the chimeras significantly enhancing the regeneration efficiency of D. catenatum through in planta transformation. Further, mutating the microRNA396 (miR396) target sites in TaGRF4 and DcGRF4 improved regeneration efficiency. The target mimicry version of miR396 (MIM396) not only boosted shoot regeneration but also enhanced plant growth. Our methods revealed a powerful tool for the enhanced regeneration and genetic transformation of D. catenatum.
BackgroundFat traits in cattle are considered important due to their contribution to beef eating quality and carcass economic value. Discovering the genes controlling fat traits in cattle will enable better selection of these traits, but identifying these genes in individual experiments has proven difficult. Compared to individual experiments, meta-analyses allow greater statistical power for detecting quantitative trait loci and identifying genes that influence single and multiple economically important fat traits.ResultsThis meta-analysis study focussed on fat traits related to the major adipose depots in cattle (namely, carcass fat, intramuscular fat, internal fat, intermuscular fat, and subcutaneous fat) and was conducted using data from the Animal Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) database. There were more Meta-QTL regions for intramuscular fat and subcutaneous fat (n = 158 and n = 55 regions, respectively) and far fewer for carcass fat and internal fat (n = 2 regions each). There were no Meta-QTL regions found for intermuscular fat. Of these 216 Meta-QTL regions, only 16 regions overlapped and affected two or more fat depots. The number of genes found for the fat depots was reflected in the size and number of the Meta-QTL regions (n = 20, 84, 1336 and 3853 genes for the carcass, internal, subcutaneous and intramuscular fat, respectively). The identification of these QTL allowed a more refined search for candidate genes. For example, the 232 genes in the Meta-QTL regions for carcass fat on BTA2, for intramuscular fat on BTA12, and the overlapping Meta-QTL regions on BTA2, BTA5, and BTA6 were readily screened, and 26 candidate genes were nominated based on their physiological roles using the GeneCards and DAVID databases.ConclusionsThe number of Meta-QTL regions for the various fat depots was relative to the number of associations in the database. However, the scarcity of overlapping Meta-QTL regions suggests that pleiotropic gene variants, which control multiple fat depots in cattle, are rare. The identification of candidate genes in the Meta-QTL regions will improve our knowledge of the genes with regulatory functions in adipose metabolism affecting meat quality and carcass economic value.
Background Decidualization is a critical step in establishing pregnancy in mammals. Successful decidualization depends on intricate gland-stromal crosstalk. Clusterin (Clu) is a ubiquitously secreted protein in physiological fluids that is involved in numerous physiological functions. However, the role of Clu in decidualization is not fully understood. Results In this study, we examined the expression pattern of Clu during early pregnancy in mice and explored its potential function in decidualization. Our results revealed that Clu was expressed in the uterine glands on Days 1-2 of early pregnancy and on Days 5-8 during decidualization after embryo implantation, as well as in glands at the interimplantation site. Additionally, ovariectomized mice exhibited significant upregulation of Clu expression in the uterine glands 3 h after in vivo estrogen injection. Trem2, a receptor for Clu, was detected in the decidual region of mice on Days 5-8 of early pregnancy, where it mediates Clu to regulate the decidual region. Furthermore, we observed that recombinant CLU protein increased the expression of the decidualization marker molecules insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) and prolactin (PRL) in decidual cells. However, this upregulation was not observed when Trem2 expression was inhibited with siRNA. Conclusions Uterine gland-derived Clu, a new paracrine modulator, may participate in early pregnancy by influencing the decidualization process mediated by Trem2 in mice.
BackgroundEmbryonic genome activation (EGA) is a critical step in early embryonic development, as it marks the transition from relying on maternal factors to the initiation of transcription from embryo's own genome. The factors associated with EGA are not well understood and need further investigation. PRD-like (PRDL) homeodomain transcription factors (TFs) are considered to play crucial roles in this early event during development but these TFs have evolved differently, even within mammalian lineages. Different numbers of PRDL TFs have been predicted in bovine (Bos taurus); however, their divergent evolution requires species-specific confirmation and functional investigations.ResultsIn this study, we conducted molecular cloning of mRNAs for the PRDL TFs ARGFX, DUXA, LEUTX, NOBOX, TPRX1, TPRX2, and TPRX3 in bovine oocytes or in vitro fertilized (IVF) preimplantation embryos. Our results confirmed the expression of PRDL TF genes in early bovine development at the cDNA level and uncovered their structures. For each investigated PRDL TF gene, we isolated at least one homeodomain-encoding cDNA fragment, indicative of DNA binding and thus potential role in transcriptional regulation in developing bovine embryos. Additionally, our cDNA cloning approach allowed us to reveal breed-related differences in bovine, as evidenced by the identification of a high number of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) across the PRDL class homeobox genes. Subsequently, we observed the prediction of the 9aa transactivation domain (9aaTAD) motif in the putative protein sequence of TPRX3 leading us to conduct functional analysis of this gene. We demonstrated that the TPRX3 overexpression in bovine fibroblast induces not only protein-coding genes but also short noncoding RNAs involved in splicing and RNA editing. We supported this finding by identifying a shared set of genes between our and published bovine early embryo development datasets.ConclusionsProviding full-length cDNA evidence for previously predicted homeobox genes that belong to PRDL class improves the annotation of the bovine genome. Updating the annotation with seven developmentally-important genes will enhance the accuracy of RNAseq analysis with datasets derived from bovine preimplantation embryos. In addition, the absence of TPRX3 in humans highlights the species-specific and TF-specific regulation of biological processes during early embryo development.
BackgroundIn cellular activities, essential proteins play a vital role and are instrumental in comprehending fundamental biological necessities and identifying pathogenic genes. Current deep learning approaches for predicting essential proteins underutilize the potential of gene expression data and are inadequate for the exploration of dynamic networks with limited evaluation across diverse species.ResultsWe introduce ECDEP, an essential protein identification model based on evolutionary community discovery. ECDEP integrates temporal gene expression data with a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and employs the 3-Sigma rule to eliminate outliers at each time point, constructing a dynamic network. Next, we utilize edge birth and death information to establish an interaction streaming source to feed into the evolutionary community discovery algorithm and then identify overlapping communities during the evolution of the dynamic network. SVM recursive feature elimination (RFE) is applied to extract the most informative communities, which are combined with subcellular localization data for classification predictions.We assess the performance of ECDEP by comparing it against ten centrality methods, four shallow machine learning methods with RFE, and two deep learning methods that incorporate multiple biological data sources on Saccharomyces. Cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae), Homo sapiens (H. sapiens), Mus musculus, and Caenorhabditis elegans. ECDEP achieves an AP value of 0.86 on the H. sapiens dataset and the contribution ratio of community features in classification reaches 0.54 on the S. cerevisiae (Krogan) dataset.ResultsWe introduce ECDEP, an essential protein identification model based on evolutionary community discovery. ECDEP integrates temporal gene expression data with a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and employs the 3-Sigma rule to eliminate outliers at each time point, constructing a dynamic network. Next, we utilize edge birth and death information to establish an interaction streaming source to feed into the evolutionary community discovery algorithm and then identify overlapping communities during the evolution of the dynamic network. SVM recursive feature elimination (RFE) is applied to extract the most informative communities, which are combined with subcellular localization data for classification predictions.We assess the performance of ECDEP by comparing it against ten centrality methods, four shallow machine learning methods with RFE, and two deep learning methods that incorporate multiple biological data sources on Saccharomyces. Cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae), Homo sapiens (H. sapiens), Mus musculus, and Caenorhabditis elegans. ECDEP achieves an AP value of 0.86 on the H. sapiens dataset and the contribution ratio of community features in classification reaches 0.54 on the S. cerevisiae (Krogan) dataset.ConclusionsOur proposed method adeptly integrates network dynamics and yields outstanding results across various datasets. Furthermore, the incorporation of evolutionary community discovery algorithms amplifies the capacity of gene expression data in classification.
Castration is widely used in poultry and livestock to enhance fat metabolism and improve the flavor, tenderness and juiciness of meat. However, the genetic regulatory mechanism underlying castration consequences have not been clarified. To investigate the key metabolites affecting the quality of capons and the key regulatory mechanisms, Qingyuan partridge roosters were subjected to castration. Metabolic profiling was used to detect differential metabolites in the breast muscle of both capon and control groups. Additionally, an integrative analysis of transcriptomics and proteomics was conducted to explore the genetic regulation mechanisms influencing meat quality. The results indicated that the muscle fiber density and shear force of capons was lower than that of normal chickens, and the fat percentage of capon group (CAM) was higher than control group (COM). The expression of the metabolite inostine-5'-monophosphate (IMP) was lower in capons, and lipid metabolites (PC (10:0/10:0), PC (6:0/13:1), LPC 22:6, LPC 18:2, LPE 18:1, LPE 20:4) were higher in capons. Metabolic pathways were found to be a common signaling pathway in all omics. Glutamate-ammonia ligase (GLUL), acetyl-CoA carboxylase beta (ACACB), 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase 2 (AGPAT2), 4-hydroxy-2-oxoglutarate aldolase 1 (HOGA1) and glutathione S-transferase alpha 2 (GSTA2) regulate the expression of citric acid, arachidonic acid, palmitic acid, isocitric acid, and betaine. These findings highlight the key mechanisms contributing to the meat quality differences between capons and normal chickens.
Background The Persian walnut (Juglans regia), an economically vital species within the Juglandaceae family, has seen its mitochondrial genome sequenced and assembled in the current study using advanced Illumina and Nanopore sequencing technology. Results The 1,007,576 bp mitogenome of J. regia consisted of three circular chromosomes with a 44.52% GC content encoding 39 PCGs, 47 tRNA, and five rRNA genes. Extensive repetitive sequences, including 320 SSRs, 512 interspersed, and 83 tandem repeats, were identified, contributing to genomic complexity. The protein-coding sequences (PCGs) favored A/T-ending codons, and the codon usage bias was primarily shaped by selective pressure. Intracellular gene transfer occurred among the mitogenome, chloroplast, and nuclear genomes. Comparative genomic analysis unveiled abundant structure and sequence variation among J. regia and related species. The results of selective pressure analysis indicated that most PCGs underwent purifying selection, whereas the atp4 and ccmB genes had experienced positive selection between many species pairs. In addition, the phylogenetic examination, grounded in mitochondrial genome data, precisely delineated the evolutionary and taxonomic relationships of J. regia and its relatives. We identified a total of 539 RNA editing sites, among which 288 were corroborated by transcriptome sequencing data. Furthermore, expression profiling under temperature stress highlighted the complex regulation pattern of 28 differently expressed PCGs, wherein NADH dehydrogenase and ATP synthase genes might be critical in the mitochondria response to cold stress. Conclusions Our results provided valuable molecular resources for understanding the genetic characteristics of J. regia and offered novel perspectives for population genetics and evolutionary studies in Juglans and related woody species.
The homeodomain-leucine zipper (HD-Zip) gene family plays a pivotal role in plant development and stress responses. Nevertheless, a comprehensive characterization of the HD-Zip gene family in kiwifruit has been lacking. In this study, we have systematically identified 70 HD-Zip genes in the Actinidia chinensis (Ac) genome and 55 in the Actinidia eriantha (Ae) genome. These genes have been categorized into four subfamilies (HD-Zip I, II, III, and IV) through rigorous phylogenetic analysis. Analysis of synteny patterns and selection pressures has provided insights into how whole-genome duplication (WGD) or segmental may have contributed to the divergence in gene numbers between these two kiwifruit species, with duplicated gene pairs undergoing purifying selection. Furthermore, our study has unveiled tissue-specific expression patterns among kiwifruit HD-Zip genes, with some genes identified as key regulators of kiwifruit responses to bacterial canker disease and postharvest processes. These findings not only offer valuable insights into the evolutionary and functional characteristics of kiwifruit HD-Zips but also shed light on their potential roles in plant growth and development.
BackgroundKruppel-like factor 1 (KLF1), a crucial erythroid transcription factor, plays a significant role in various erythroid changes and haemolytic diseases. The rare erythrocyte Lutheran inhibitor (In(Lu)) blood group phenotype serves as an effective model for identifying KLF1 hypomorphic and loss-of-function variants. In this study, we aimed to analyse the genetic background of the In(Lu) phenotype in a population-based sample group by high-throughput technologies to find potentially clinically significant KLF1 variants.ResultsWe included 62 samples with In(Lu) phenotype, screened from over 300,000 Chinese blood donors. Among them, 36 samples were sequenced using targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), whereas 19 samples were sequenced using High Fidelity (HiFi) technology. In addition, seven samples were simply sequenced using Sanger sequencing. A total of 29 hypomorphic or loss-of-function variants of KLF1 were identified, 21 of which were newly discovered. All new variants discovered by targeted NGS or HiFi sequencing were validated through Sanger sequencing, and the obtained results were found to be consistent. The KLF1 haplotypes of all new variants were further confirmed using clone sequencing or HiFi sequencing. The lack of functional KLF1 variants detected in the four samples indicates the presence of additional regulatory mechanisms. In addition, some samples exhibited BCAM polymorphisms, which encodes antigens of the Lutheran (LU) blood group system. However, no BCAM mutations which leads to the absence of LU proteins were detected.ConclusionsHigh-throughput sequencing methods, particularly HiFi sequencing, were introduced for the first time into genetic analysis of the In(Lu) phenotype. Targeted NGS and HiFi sequencing demonstrated the accuracy of the results, providing additional advantages such as simultaneous analysis of other blood group genes and clarification of haplotypes. Using the In(Lu) phenotype, a powerful model for identifying hypomorphic or loss-of-function KLF1 variants, numerous novel variants have been detected, which have contributed to the comprehensive understanding of KLF1. These clinically significant KLF1 mutations can serve as a valuable reference for the diagnosis of related blood cell diseases.
Background Global per capita meat consumption continues to rise, especially pork. Meat quality is influenced by the content of intramuscular fat (IMF) as a key factor. The longissimus dorsi muscle of Dahe pigs (DHM, IMF: 7.98% +/- 1.96%) and Dahe black pigs (DHBM, IMF: 3.30% +/- 0.64%) was studied to explore cellular heterogeneity and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with IMF deposition using single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq). The lipid composition was then analyzed using non-targeted lipidomics. Results A total of seven cell subpopulations were identified, including myocytes, fibroblast/fibro/adipogenic progenitors (FAPs), satellite cells, endothelial cells, macrophages, pericytes, and adipocytes. Among them, FAPs and adipocytes were more focused because they could be associated with lipid deposition. 1623 DEGs in the FAPs subpopulation of DHBM were up-regulated compared with DHM, while 1535 were down-regulated. These DEGs enriched in the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway. 109 DEGs were up-regulated and 806 were down-regulated in the adipocyte subpopulation of DHBM compared with DHM, which were mainly enriched in the PPAR signaling pathway and fatty acid (FA) biosynthesis. The expression level of PPARG, ABP4, LEP, and ACSL1 genes in DHM was higher than that in DHBM. Lipidomics reveals porcine lipid composition characteristics of muscle tissue. A total of 41 lipid classes and 2699 lipid species were identified in DHM and DHBM groups. The top ten relative peak areas of lipid classes in DHM and DHBM were triglyceride (TG), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS), diglyceride (DG), cardiolipin (CL), ceramides (Cer), Simple Glc series (Hex1Cer), sphingomyelin (phSM), and phosphatidylinositol (PI). The relative peak areas of 35 lipid species in DHM were lower than DHBM, and 28 lipid species that were higher. There was a significant increase in the TG fatty acyl chains C6:0, C17:0, and C11:4, and a significant decrease in C16:0, C18:1, C18:2, and C22:4 in DHBM (p < 0.05). Conclusions C16:0 FA may downregulate the expression level of PPARG gene, which leads to the downregulation of fat metabolism-related genes such as ACSL, PLIN2, and FABP4 in DHBM compared with DHM. This may be the reason that the lipid deposition ability of Dahe pigs is stronger than that of Dahe black pigs, which need further investigation.
BackgroundThis study aimed to assess the prevalence and genomic characteristics of Shiga-toxigenic (STEC) and Enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) strains in raw mussels and ready-to-eat (RTE)-stuffed mussels, focusing on potential public health implications for identifying virulence and antimicrobial resistance genes.ResultsThe genome sequence analysis identified the E. coli strain named 23EM as serotype O111:H12, with adhesion (fimH-54) and fumarate hydratase (fumC-11) genes. The draft genome (4.9 Mb, 50.6% GC content, 111 contigs, 4,688 genes) is available in NCBI GenBank (accession JAWXVJ000000000). The strain, classified as ST292 and CC ST10, showed high similarity to nonpathogenic E. coli MG1655 but was distinct from pathogenic strains such as EAEC and ExPEC. In silico serotyping revealed the presence of O111-antigen flippase (wzx) and H12-antigen flagellin (fliC) genes. The strain harbors an IncFII (pCoo) plasmid with 96.95% identity. PathogenFinder predicted a 92% probability of being a human pathogen, supported by 720 pathogenic protein families. CRISPR analysis identified one high-evidence sequence with nine spacers and six low-evidence sequences. Phylogenetic analysis using RAxML positioned 23EM close to nonpathogenic E. coli but distant from other pathogenic strains. Antimicrobial resistance genes across multiple classes, including macrolides, fluoroquinolones, and aminoglycosides, were identified. The strain also contains several virulence factors, such as adhesins (e.g., ECP, ELF, TIF, type IV pili), and autotransporter genes (espP, pic), highlighting its significant pathogenic potential and public health risk.ConclusionsThis study highlights the ability of the detection of E. coli strains harboring virulence and antimicrobial resistance genes in mussels, thus emphasizing the importance of ongoing surveillance and careful consideration of the potential risks associated with the consumption of these shellfish.
Objective This study aims to analyze the molecular characteristics of the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) Omicron variant BA.2.76 in Jining City, China.Methods Whole-genome sequencing was performed on 87 cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Evolutionary trees were constructed using bioinformatics software to analyze sequence homology, variant sites, N-glycosylation sites, and phosphorylation sites.Results All 87 SARS-CoV-2 whole-genome sequences were classified under the evolutionary branch of the Omicron variant BA.2.76. Their similarity to the reference strain Wuhan-Hu-1 ranged from 99.72 to 99.74%. In comparison to the reference strain Wuhan-Hu-1, the 87 sequences exhibited 77-84 nucleotide differences and 27 nucleotide deletions. A total of 69 amino acid variant sites, 9 amino acid deletions, and 1 stop codon mutation were identified across 18 proteins. Among them, the spike (S) protein exhibited the highest number of variant sites, and the ORF8 protein showed a Q27 stop mutation. Multiple proteins displayed variations in glycosylation and phosphorylation sites.Conclusion SARS-CoV-2 continues to evolve, giving rise to new strains with enhanced transmission, stronger immune evasion capabilities, and reduced pathogenicity. The application of high-throughput sequencing technologies in the epidemic prevention and control of COVID-19 provides crucial insights into the evolutionary and variant characteristics of the virus at the genomic level, thereby holding significant implications for the prevention and control of the COVID-19 pandemic.
BackgroundThe phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) gene, a well-studied plant defense gene, is crucial for growth, development, and stress resistance. The PAL gene family has been studied in many plants. Citrus is among the most vital cash crops worldwide. However, the PAL gene family has not been comprehensively studied in most Citrus species, and the biological functions and specific underlying mechanisms are unclear.ResultsWe identified 41 PAL genes from nine Citrus species and revealed different patterns of evolution among the PAL genes in different Citrus species. Gene duplication was found to be a vital mechanism for the expansion of the PAL gene family in citrus. In addition, there was a strong correlation between the ability of PAL genes to respond to stress and their evolutionary duration in citrus. PAL genes with shorter evolutionary times were involved in more multiple stress responses, and these PAL genes with broad-spectrum resistance were all single-copy genes. By further integrating the lignin and flavonoid synthesis pathways in citrus, we observed that PAL genes contribute to the synthesis of lignin and flavonoids, which enhance the physical defense and ROS scavenging ability of citrus plants, thereby helping them withstand stress.ConclusionsThis study provides a comprehensive framework of the PAL gene family in citrus, and we propose a hypothetical model for the stress resistance mechanism in citrus. This study provides a foundation for further investigations into the biological functions of PAL genes in the growth, development, and response to various stresses in citrus.
BackgroundStreptococcus canis is a commensal bacterium in companion animals. This microorganism can infect humans who have been in deep contact with or bitten by pet dogs, suggesting that the skin/soft tissue is one of infection entry sites. To understand pathological process in human cells, we aimed to determine S. canis transcriptomic changes in invasive environments of human keratinocytes.MethodsWe selected one isolate from candidates with whole-genome sequences, based on re-obtained cell invasion ability (CIA) data into human keratinocytes along with bacterial cytotoxicity. RNA-sequencing was conducted for the samples at baselines and 2 h/5 hr post-inoculation using NovaSeq 6000. Global/differential gene expression analyses [principal component analysis (PCA)/k-means clustering analysis/differentially expressed gene (DEG) analyses] were performed. We classified DEGs into their functional categories. To validate transcriptomic results, we did quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assays.ResultsFU1 isolate was selected from seven candidates, based on re-obtained CIA data with less cytotoxicity. Total read bases of 6.17-9.02 Gbp were obtained by RNA-sequencing. PCA and k-means clustering analysis indicated clustering according to their inoculation times. Volcano plots and Venn diagrams revealed that S. canis invasion into keratinocytes produced altered distributions of many genes. Gene ontology enrichment analysis showed most of the gene expressions were downregulated. DEG functional analysis showed the downregulated DEGs belonging to energy production and conversion/carbohydrate transport and metabolism/amino acid transport and metabolism/nucleotide transport and metabolism, with the upregulated DEGs belonging to transcription. qRT-PCR assays for downregulated/upregulated expressions of four genes (pgk-slo/opuAA-kdpB) validated transcriptomic results.ConclusionOur observations suggest that S. canis can downregulate its metabolism-associated gene expressions in human keratinocyte environments. The observed gene expression changes can imply the latent infection in human cells. Further investigation is needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms for the latent infection.
Long-read sequencing is revolutionizing de-novo genome assemblies, with continued advancements making it more readily available for previously understudied, non-model organisms. Stony corals are one such example, with long-read de-novo genome assemblies now starting to be publicly available, opening the door for a wide array of 'omics-based research. Here we present a new de-novo genome assembly for the endangered Caribbean star coral, Orbicella faveolata, using PacBio circular consensus reads. Our genome assembly improved the contiguity (51 versus 1,933 contigs) and complete and single copy BUSCO orthologs (93.6% versus 85.3%, database metazoa_odb10), compared to the currently available reference genome generated using short-read methodologies. Our new de-novo assembled genome also showed comparable quality metrics to other coral long-read genomes. Telomeric repeat analysis identified putative chromosomes in our scaffolded assembly, with these repeats at either one, or both ends, of scaffolded contigs. We identified 32,172 protein coding genes in our assembly through use of long-read RNA sequencing (ISO-seq) of additional O. faveolata fragments exposed to a range of abiotic and biotic treatments, and publicly available short-read RNA-seq data. With anthropogenic influences heavily affecting O. faveolata, as well as its increasing incorporation into reef restoration activities, this updated genome resource can be used for population genomics and other 'omics analyses to aid in the conservation of this species.
Passionfruit (Passiflora edulis) is a significant fruit crop in the commercial sector, owing to its high nutritional and medicinal value. The advent of high-throughput genomics sequencing technology has led to the publication of a vast amount of passionfruit omics data, encompassing complete genome sequences and transcriptome data under diverse stress conditions. To facilitate the efficient integration, storage, and analysis of these large-scale datasets, and to enable researchers to effectively utilize these omics data, we developed the first passionfruit genome database (PGD). The PGD platform comprises a diverse range of functional modules, including a genome browser, search function, heatmap, gene expression patterns, various tools, sequence alignment, and batch download, thereby providing a user-friendly interface. Additionally, supplementary practical tools have been developed for the PGD, such as gene family analysis tools, gene ontology (GO) terms, a pathway enrichment analysis, and other data analysis and mining tools, which enhance the data's utilization value. By leveraging the database's robust scalability, the intention is to continue to collect and integrate passionfruit omics data in the PGD, providing comprehensive and in-depth support for passionfruit research. The PGD is freely accessible via http://passionfruit.com.cn.
Background Indigenous Chinese cattle have abundant genetic diversity and a long history of artificial selection, giving local breeds advantages in adaptability, forage tolerance and resistance. The detection of selective sweeps and comparative genome analysis of selected breeds and ancestral populations provide a basis for understanding differences among breeds and for the identification and utilization of candidate genes. We investigated genetic diversity, population structure, and signatures of selection using genome-wide sequencing data for a new breed of Qinchuan cattle (QNC, n = 21), ancestral Qinchuan cattle (QCC, n = 20), and Zaosheng cattle (ZSC, n = 19).Results A population structure analysis showed that the ancestry components of QNC and ZSC were similar. In addition, the QNC and ZSC groups showed higher proportions of European taurine ancestry than that of QCC, and this may explain the larger body size of QNC, approaching that of European cattle under long-term domestication and selection. A neighbor-joining tree revealed that QCC individuals were closely related, whereas QNC formed a distinct group. To search for signatures of selection in the QNC genome, we evaluated nucleotide diversity (theta pi), the fixation index (F ST) and Tajima's D. Overlapping selective sweeps were enriched for one KEGG pathway, the apelin signaling pathway, and included five candidate genes (MEF2A, SMAD2, CAMK4, RPS6, and PIK3CG). We performed a comprehensive review of genomic variants in QNC, QCC, and ZSC using whole-genome sequencing data. QCC was rich in novel genetic diversity, while diversity in QNC and ZSC cattle was reduced due to strong artificial selection, with divergence from the original cattle.Conclusions We identified candidate genes associated with production traits. These results support the success of selective breeding and can guide further breeding and resource conservation of Qinchuan cattle.
Background Carotenoid cleavage oxygenases (CCOs) are a group of enzymes that catalyze the oxidative cleavage of carotenoid molecules. These enzymes widely exist in plants, fungi, and certain bacteria, and are involved in various biological processes. It would be of great importance and necessity to identify CCO members in birch and characterize their responses upon abiotic stresses. Results A total of 16 BpCCOs, including 8 BpCCDs and 8 BpNCEDs were identified in birch, and phylogenetic tree analysis showed that they could be classified into six subgroups. Collinearity analysis revealed that BpCCOs have the largest number of homologous genes in Gossypium hirsutum and also have more homologous genes in other dicotyledons. In addition, promoter analysis revealed that the promoter regions of BpCCOs contained many abiotic stress-related and hormone-responsive elements. The results of qRT-PCR showed that most of the BpCCOs were able to respond significantly to ABA, PEG, salt and cold stresses. Finally, the prediction of the interacting proteins of BpCCOs by STRING revealed several proteins that may interact with BpCCOs and be involved in plant growth and development/abiotic stress processes, such as HEC1 (bHLH), ATABA1, ATVAMP714, etc. Conclusion In this study, the CCO members were identified in birch in a genome-wide scale. These results indicate that BpCCO genes may play important roles in the abiotic stress responses of birch plants.
The prediction of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-peptide binding affinity is an important branch in immune bioinformatics, especially helpful in accelerating the design of disease vaccines and immunity therapy. Although deep learning-based solutions have yielded promising results on MHC-II molecules in recent years, these methods ignored structure knowledge from each peptide when employing the deep neural network models. Each peptide sequence has its specific combination order, so it is worth considering adding the structural information of the peptide sequence to the deep model training. In this work, we use positional encoding to represent the structural information of peptide sequences and validly combine the positional encoding with existing models by different strategies. Experiments on three datasets show that the introduction of position-coding information can further improve the performance built upon the existing model. The idea of introducing positional encoding to this field can provide important reference significance for the optimization of the deep network structure in the future.
BackgroundHeat stress (HS) can affect the physiology and metabolism of animals. HS-induced intestinal inflammation in pigs is a common disease, causing severe diarrhea, that can result in substantial economic losses to the pig industry, but the molecular mechanisms and pathogenicity of this disease are not fully understood. The objective of this study was to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and long noncoding RNAs (DELs) related to inflammation in the colon tissues of pigs under constant (1, 7, and 14 days) HS.ResultsLncRNA and targeted gene interaction networks were constructed. GO annotation and KEGG pathway analyses were subsequently performed to determine the functions of the DEGs and DELs. The results revealed 57, 212, and 54 DEGs and 87, 79, and 55 DELs in the CON/H01, CON/H07, and CON/H14 groups, respectively. KRT85, CLDN1, S100A12, TM7SF2, CCN1, NR4A1, and several lncRNAs may be involved in regulating the development of intestinal inflammation. GO analysis indicated that the DEGs and DELs were enriched in a series of biological processes involved in the innate immune response, RAGE receptor binding, and positive regulation of the ERK1 and ERK2 cascades. KEGG pathways related to inflammation, such as the tight junction (TJ) and MAPK signaling pathways, were enriched in DEGs and DELs.ConclusionsThis study have expanded the knowledge about colon inflammation-related genes and lncRNA biology in pigs under HS; analyzed the the lncRNA-mRNA interaction for HS-induced intestinal inflammation. These results may provide some references for our understanding of the molecular mechanism of the intestinal response to HS in pig.
BackgroundDNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that plays an important role in animal and plant development. Among the diverse types of DNA methylation modifications, methylation of cytosines catalyzed by DNA cytosine methyltransferases (DNMTs) is the most common. Recently, we characterized DNA methyltransferase genes including HlDnmt1 and HlDnmt from the Asian longhorned tick, Haemaphysalis longicornis. However, the dynamic expression and functions of these DNMTs at different developmental stages and feeding statuses of the important vector tick H. longicornis remain unknown.ResultsThe expression levels of HlDnmt1 and HlDnmt were significantly different at the four developmental stages: eggs, larvae, nymphs, and adults, with the highest expression levels observed in the larval stage. HlDnmt1 and HlDnmt showed different expression trends in the midguts, ovary, Malpighian tubules, and salivary glands of engorged adults, with the highest expression of HlDnmt1 observed in the ovary and the lowest in the midguts; HlDnmt expression was the highest in the midguts and the lowest in the Malpighian tubules. After RNA interference, the relative expression of HlDnmt1 and HlDnmt in H. longicornis decreased significantly, resulting in a significant decrease in the biting rate of H. longicornis. RNA-seq revealed that the differentially expressed genes were mainly enriched in the biological processes of peptide biosynthesis and the cell components of ribosomes. Molecular functions were mainly concentrated on oxidoreductase activity, ribosome structure composition, serine-type endopeptidase activity, molecular function regulators, and endopeptidase inhibitor activity. KEGG enrichment analysis showed that the differentially expressed genes were mainly enriched in autophagy and lysosome pathways, amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, glyceride metabolism, ribosomes, and other pathways.ConclusionsHlDnmt1 and HlDnmt played an important role during development and feeding of H. longicornis, and their functions were potentially associated with lysosome pathways. These results provide basic knowledge for understanding the epigenetic regulation of the development of the tick H. longicornis, which sheds light on control strategies for ticks and tick-borne diseases.
Background Heritability partitioning approaches estimate the contribution of different functional classes, such as coding or regulatory variants, to the genetic variance. This information allows a better understanding of the genetic architecture of complex traits, including complex diseases, but can also help improve the accuracy of genomic selection in livestock species. However, methods have mainly been tested on human genomic data, whereas livestock populations have specific characteristics, such as high levels of relatedness, small effective population size or long-range levels of linkage disequilibrium. Results Here, we used data from 14,762 cows, imputed at the whole-genome sequence level for 11,537,240 variants, to simulate traits in a typical livestock population and evaluate the accuracy of two state-of-the-art heritability partitioning methods, GREML and a Bayesian mixture model. In simulations where a single functional class had increased contribution to heritability, we observed that the estimators were unbiased but had low precision. When causal variants were enriched in variants with low (< 0.05) or high (> 0.20) minor allele frequency or low (below 1st quartile) or high (above 3rd quartile) linkage disequilibrium scores, it was necessary to partition the genetic variance into multiple classes defined on the basis of allele frequencies or LD scores to obtain unbiased results. When multiple functional classes had variable contributions to heritability, estimators showed higher levels of variation and confounding between certain categories was observed. In addition, estimators from small categories were particularly imprecise. However, the estimates and their ranking were still informative about the contribution of the classes. We also demonstrated that using methods that estimate the contribution of a single category at a time, a commonly used approach, results in an overestimation. Finally, we applied the methods to phenotypes for muscular development and height and estimated that, on average, variants in open chromatin regions had a higher contribution to the genetic variance (> 45%), while variants in coding regions had the strongest individual effects (> 25-fold enrichment on average). Conversely, variants in intergenic or intronic regions showed lower levels of enrichment (0.2 and 0.6-fold on average, respectively). Conclusions Heritability partitioning approaches should be used cautiously in livestock populations, in particular for small categories. Two-component approaches that fit only one functional category at a time lead to biased estimators and should not be used.
Background Gibberella ear rot (GER) is one of the most devastating diseases in maize growing areas, which directly reduces grain yield and quality. However, the underlying defense response of maize to pathogens infection is largely unknown. Results To gain a comprehensive understanding of the defense response in GER resistance, two contrasting inbred lines 'Nov-82' and 'H10' were used to explore transcriptomic profiles and defense-related phytohormonal alterations during Fusarium graminearum infection. Transcriptomic analysis revealed 4,417 and 4,313 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from the Nov-82 and H10, respectively, and 647 common DEGs between the two lines. More DEGs were obviously enriched in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, secondary metabolites biosynthesis, metabolic process and defense-related pathways. In addition, the concentration of the defense-related phytohormones, jasmonates (JAs) and salicylates (SAs), was greatly induced after the pathogen infection. The level of JAs in H10 was more higher than in Nov-82, whereas an opposite pattern for the SA between the both lines. Integrated analysis of the DEGs and the phytohormones revealed five vital modules based on co-expression network analysis according to their correlation. A total of 12 hub genes encoding fatty acid desaturase, subtilisin-like protease, ethylene-responsive transcription factor, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase, and sugar transport protein were captured from the key modules, indicating that these genes might play unique roles in response to pathogen infection, Conclusions Overall, our results indicate that large number DEGs related to plant disease resistance and different alteration of defensive phytohormones were activated during F. graminearum infection, providing new insight into the defense response against pathogen invasion, in addition to the identified hub genes that can be further investigated for enhancing maize GER resistance.
Background In evolutionary biology, identifying and quantifying inter-lineage genome size variation and elucidating the underlying causes of that variation have long been goals. Repetitive elements (REs) have been proposed and confirmed as being among the most important contributors to genome size variation. However, the evolutionary implications of genome size variation and RE dynamics are not well understood. ResultsA total of 35 Ensifera insects were collected from different areas in China, including nine species of crickets and 26 species of katydids. The genome sizes of seven species were then determined using flow cytometry. The RepeatExplorer2 pipeline was employed to retrieve the repeated sequences for each species, based on low-coverage (0.1 X) high-throughput Illumina unassembled short reads. The genome sizes of the 35 Ensifera insects exhibited a considerable degree of variation, ranging from 1.00 to 18.34 pg. This variation was more than 18-fold. Similarly, the RE abundances exhibited considerable variation, ranging from 13.66 to 61.16%. In addition, the Tettigonioidea had larger genomes and contained significantly more REs than did the Grylloidea genomes. Analysis of the correlation between RE abundance and the genome size of 35 Ensifera insects revealed that the abundance of REs, transposable elements (TEs), long terminal repeats (LTRs), and long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs) are significantly correlated with genome size. Notably, there is an inflection point in this correlation, where species with increasingly large genomes (e.g., > 5-10 pg) have repeats that contribute less to genome expansion than expected. Furthermore, this study revealed contrasting evolutionary directions between the Tettigonioidea and Grylloidea clades in terms of the expansion of REs. Tettigonioidea species exhibit a gradual increase in ancestral genome size and RE abundance as they diverge, while Grylloidea species experience sustained genome contraction. ConclusionsThis study reveals extensive variation in genome size and RE abundance in Ensifera insects, with distinct evolutionary patterns across two major groups, Tettigonioidea and Grylloidea. This provides valuable insights into the variation in genome size and RE abundance in Ensifera insects, offering a comprehensive understanding of their evolutionary history.
Background Alpha-papillomavirus 9 (alpha-9) is a member of the human papillomavirus (HPV) alpha genus, causing 75% invasive cervical cancers worldwide. The purpose of this study was to provide data for effective treatment of HPV-induced cervical lesions in Taizhou by analysing the genetic variation and antigenic epitopes of alpha-9 HPV E6 and E7.Methods Cervical exfoliated cells were collected for HPV genotyping. Positive samples of the alpha-9 HPV single type were selected for E6 and E7 gene sequencing. The obtained nucleotide sequences were translated into amino acid sequences (protein primary structure) using MEGA X, and positive selection sites of the amino acid sequences were evaluated using PAML. The secondary and tertiary structures of the E6 and E7 proteins were predicted using PSIPred, SWISS-MODEL, and PyMol. Potential T/B-cell epitopes were predicted by Industrial Engineering Database (IEDB).Results From 2012 to 2023, alpha-9 HPV accounted for 75.0% (7815/10423) of high-risk HPV-positive samples in Taizhou, both alone and in combination with other types. Among these, single-type-positive samples of alpha-9 HPV were selected, and the entire E6 and E7 genes were sequenced, including 298 HPV16, 149 HPV31, 185 HPV33, 123 HPV35, 325 HPV52, and 199 HPV58 samples. Compared with reference sequences, 34, 12, 10, 2, 17, and 17 nonsynonymous nucleotide mutations were detected in HPV16, 31, 33, 35, 52, and 58, respectively. Among all nonsynonymous nucleotide mutations, 19 positive selection sites were selected, which may have evolutionary significance in rendering alpha-9 HPV adaptive to its environment. Immunoinformatics predicted 57 potential linear and 59 conformational B-cell epitopes, many of which are also predicted as CTL epitopes.Conclusion The present study provides almost comprehensive data on the genetic variations, phylogenetics, positive selection sites, and antigenic epitopes of alpha-9 HPV E6 and E7 in Taizhou, China, which will be helpful for local HPV therapeutic vaccine development.
Background Macrobrachium nipponense is a freshwater prawn of economic importance in China. Its reproductive molt is crucial for seedling rearing and directly impacts the industry's economic efficiency. 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E) controls various physiological behaviors in crustaceans, among which is the initiation of molt. Previous studies have shown that 20E plays a vital role in regulating molt and oviposition in M. nipponense. However, research on the molecular mechanisms underlying the reproductive molt and role of 20E in M. nipponense is still limited.Results A total of 240.24 Gb of data was obtained from 18 tissue samples by transcriptome sequencing, with > 6 Gb of clean reads per sample. The efficiency of comparison with the reference transcriptome ranged from 87.05 to 92.48%. A total of 2532 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. Eighty-seven DEGs associated with molt or 20E were screened in the transcriptomes of the different tissues sampled in both the experimental and control groups. The reliability of the RNA sequencing data was confirmed using Quantitative Real-Time PCR. The expression levels of the eight strong candidate genes showed significant variation at the different stages of molt.Conclusion This study established the first transcriptome library for the different tissues of M. nipponense in response to 20E and demonstrated the dominant role of 20E in the molting process of this species. The discovery of a large number of 20E-regulated strong candidate DEGs further confirms the extensive regulatory role of 20E and provides a foundation for the deeper understanding of its molecular regulatory mechanisms.
BackgroundInflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are autoimmune diseases that often coexist clinically. This phenomenon might be due to shared genetic components.MethodsGenome-wide association study (GWAS) data for IBD and SLE were analyzed to determine both global and local genetic correlations using three methodologies: linkage disequilibrium score regression (LDSC), genetic covariance analyzer (GNOVA), and SUPERGNOVA. The genetic overlap and risk loci were subsequently examined using the conditional/conjunctional false discovery rate (cond/conjFDR) statistical framework. Furthermore, a multi-trait analysis of MTAG was employed to validate the loci, followed by an LDSC analysis focusing on tissue-specific gene expression.ResultsGWAS findings demonstrated a marked global genetic correlation between IBD (including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis) and SLE. Locally, SLE showed a strong association with IBD and Crohn's disease on chromosomes 10, 19, and 22. ConjFDR analysis confirmed the genetic overlap and identified relevant genetic risk loci. MTAG further validated several shared susceptibility genes. Additionally, the LDSC-SEG analysis results indicate that IBD (including CD and UC) and SLE are jointly enriched in the tissues of Spleen and Whole Blood.ConclusionThis study confirms a genetic overlap between IBD and SLE, identifying marked comorbid genes and offering new insights for treating these diseases.
BackgroundTwo-line hybrid wheat technology system is one way to harness wheat heterosis both domestically and internationally. Seed vigor is a crucial parameter for assessing seed quality, as enhanced seed vigor can lead to yield increments of over 20% to a certain extent. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) were known to participate in the development and vigor of seed in plants, but its impact on seed vigor in two-line hybrid wheat remains poorly elucidated.ResultsThe hybrid (BS1453/11GF5135) wheat exhibited superiority in seed vigor and anti-aging capacity, compared to its male parent (11GF5135, MP) and female parent (BS1453, FP). We identified four miRNAs associated with seed vigor, all of which are novel miRNAs. The majority of targets of miRNAs were related to ubiquitin ligases, kinases, sucrose synthases and hydrolases, involving in starch and sucrose metabolism, hydrolysis, catalysis, plant hormone signal transduction, and other pathways, which played crucial roles in seed development. Additionally, we also found miR531 was differentially expressed in both male parent and hybrid, and its target gene was a component of the E1 subunit of alpha-ketoate dehydrogenase complex, which interacted with dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase (E2) and dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3). Finally, We established a presumptive interaction model to speculate the relationship of miR531 and seed vigor.ConclusionsThis study analyzed the seed vigor of two-line hybrid wheat, and screened seed vigor-related miRNAs. Meanwhile speculated the genetic relationship of hybrid and parents, in terms of miRNAs. Consequently, the present study provides new insights into the miRNA-mediated gene and protein interaction network that regulates seed vigor. These findings hold significance for enhancing the yield and quality of two-line hybrid wheat, facilitating its future applications.
MeFtsZ2-1 is a key gene for plant plastid division, but the mechanism by which MeFtsZ2-1 affects pigment accumulation in cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) through plastids remains unclear. We found that MeFtsZ2-1 overexpression in cassava (OE) exhibited darker colors of leaves, with increased levels of anthocyanins and carotenoids. Further observation via Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) revealed no apparent defects in chloroplast structure but an increase in the number of plastoglobule in OE leaves. RNA-seq results showed 1582 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in leaves of OE. KEGG pathway analysis indicated that these DEGs were enriched in pathways related to flavonoid, anthocyanin, and carotenoid biosynthesis. This study reveals the role of MeFtsZ2-1 in cassava pigment accumulation from a physiological and transcriptomic perspective, providing a theoretical basis for improving cassava quality.
MeFtsZ2-1 is a key gene for plant plastid division, but the mechanism by which MeFtsZ2-1 affects pigment accumulation in cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) through plastids remains unclear. We found that MeFtsZ2-1 overexpression in cassava (OE) exhibited darker colors of leaves, with increased levels of anthocyanins and carotenoids. Further observation via Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) revealed no apparent defects in chloroplast structure but an increase in the number of plastoglobule in OE leaves. RNA-seq results showed 1582 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in leaves of OE. KEGG pathway analysis indicated that these DEGs were enriched in pathways related to flavonoid, anthocyanin, and carotenoid biosynthesis. This study reveals the role of MeFtsZ2-1 in cassava pigment accumulation from a physiological and transcriptomic perspective, providing a theoretical basis for improving cassava quality.
Background Campylobacter spp. is the most frequent cause of bacterial food-borne gastroenteritis and a high priority antibiotic resistant bacterium according to the World Health Organization (WHO). European monitoring of thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. does not reflect the global burden of resistances already circulating within the bacterial population worldwide. Methods We systematically compared whole genome sequencing with comprehensive phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility, analyzing 494 thermotolerant Campylobacter poultry isolates from Vietnam and Germany. Any discrepancy was checked by repeating the wet lab and improving the dry lab part. Selected isolates were additionally analyzed via long-read Oxford Nanopore technology, leading to closed chromosomes and plasmids. Results Overall, 22 different resistance genes and gene variants (e. g. erm(B), aph(3')-IIIa, aph(2'')-If, catA, lnu(C), blaOXA, sat4) and point mutations in three distinct genes (gyrA, 23S rRNA, rpsL) associated with AMR were present in the Campylobacter isolates. Two AMR genes were missing in the database and one falsely associated with resistance. Bioinformatic analysis based on short-read data partly failed to identify tet(O) and aadE, when the genes were present as duplicate or homologous gene variants. Intriguingly, isolates also contained different determinants, redundantly conferring resistance to chloramphenicol, gentamicin, kanamycin, lincomycin and streptomycin. We found a novel tet(W) in tetracycline sensitive strains, harboring point mutations. Furthermore, analysis based on assemblies from short-read data was impaired to identify full length phase variable aad9, due to variations of the poly-C tract within the gene. The genetic determinant responsible for gentamicin resistance of one isolate from Germany could not be identified. GyrT86I, presenting the main determinant for (fluoro-)quinolone resistance led to a rare atypical phenotype of ciprofloxacin resistance but nalidixic acid sensitivity. Long-read sequencing predicted AMR genes were mainly located on the chromosome, and rarely on plasmids. Predictions from long- and short-read sequencing, respectively, often differed. AMR genes were often organized in multidrug resistance islands (MDRI) and partially located in proximity to transposase genes, suggesting main mobilization of resistance determinants is via natural transformation and transposition in Campylobacter. Conclusions The results of this study suggest that there is frequent resistance gene duplication, mosaicism, and mutation leading to gene variation and truncation in Campylobacter strains that have not been reported in previous studies and are missing from databases. Furthermore, there is a need for deciphering yet unknown resistance mechanisms and resistance spread in thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. that may pose a challenge to global food safety.
BackgroundCarcass weight (HCW) and marbling (MARB) are critical for meat quality and market value in beef cattle. In composite breeds like Brangus, which meld the genetics of Angus and Brahman, SNP-based analyses have illuminated some genetic influences on these traits, but they fall short in fully capturing the nuanced effects of breed of origin alleles (BOA) on these traits. Focus on the impacts of BOA on phenotypic features within Brangus populations can result in a more profound understanding of the specific influences of Angus and Brahman genetics. Moreover, the consideration of BOA becomes particularly significant when evaluating dominance effects contributing to heterosis in crossbred populations. BOA provides a more comprehensive measure of heterosis due to its ability to differentiate the distinct genetic contributions originating from each parent breed. This detailed understanding of genetic effects is essential for making informed breeding decisions to optimize the benefits of heterosis in composite breeds like Brangus.ObjectiveThis study aims to identify quantitative trait loci (QTL) influencing HCW and MARB by utilizing SNP and BOA information, incorporating additive, dominance, and overdominance effects within a multi-generational Brangus commercial herd.MethodsWe analyzed phenotypic data from 1,066 genotyped Brangus steers. BOA inference was performed using LAMP-LD software using Angus and Brahman reference sets. SNP-based and BOA-based GWAS were then conducted considering additive, dominance, and overdominance models.ResultsThe study identified numerous QTLs for HCW and MARB. A notable QTL for HCW was associated to the SGCB gene, pivotal for muscle growth, and was identified solely in the BOA GWAS. Several BOA GWAS QTLs exhibited a dominance effect underscoring their importance in estimating heterosis.ConclusionsOur findings demonstrate that SNP-based methods may not detect all genetic variation affecting economically important traits in composite breeds. BOA inclusion in genomic evaluations is crucial for identifying genetic regions contributing to trait variation and for understanding the dominance value underpinning heterosis. By considering BOA, we gain a deeper understanding of genetic interactions and heterosis, which is integral to advancing breeding programs. The incorporation of BOA is recommended for comprehensive genomic evaluations to optimize trait improvements in crossbred cattle populations.
BackgroundMultiple sequence alignment (MSA) has proven extremely useful in computational biology, especially in inferring evolutionary relationships via phylogenetic analysis and providing insight into protein structure and function. An alternative to the standard MSA model is partial order alignment (POA), in which aligned sequences are represented as paths in a graph rather than rows in a matrix. While the POA model has proven useful in several applications (e.g. sequencing reads assembly and pangenome structure exploration), we lack efficient visualization tools that could highlight its advantages.ResultsWe propose Sequence Flow - a web application designed to address the above problem. Sequence Flow presents the POA as a Sankey diagram, a kind of graph visualisation typically used for graphs representing flowcharts. Sequence Flow enables interactive alignment exploration, including fragment selection, highlighting a selected group of sequences, modification of the position of graph nodes, structure simplification etc. After adjustment, the visualization can be saved as a high-quality graphic file. Thanks to the use of SanKEY.js - a JavaScript library for creating Sankey diagrams, designed specifically to visualize POAs, Sequence Flow provides satisfactory performance even with large alignments.ConclusionsWe provide Sankey diagram-based POA visualization tools for both end users (Sequence Flow) and bioinformatic software developers (SanKEY.js). Sequence Flow webservice is available at https://sequenceflow.mimuw.edu.pl/. The source code for SanKEY.js is available at https://github.com/Krzysiekzd/SanKEY.js and for Sequence Flow at https://github.com/Krzysiekzd/SequenceFlow.
Most proteins exert their functions by interacting with other proteins, making the identification of protein-protein interactions (PPI) crucial for understanding biological activities, pathological mechanisms, and clinical therapies. Developing effective and reliable computational methods for predicting PPI can significantly reduce the time-consuming and labor-intensive associated traditional biological experiments. However, accurately identifying the specific categories of protein-protein interactions and improving the prediction accuracy of the computational methods remain dual challenges. To tackle these challenges, we proposed a novel graph neural network method called GNNGL-PPI for multi-category prediction of PPI based on global graphs and local subgraphs. GNNGL-PPI consisted of two main components: using Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) to extract global graph features from PPI network graph, and employing GIN As Kernel (GIN-AK) to extract local subgraph features from the subgraphs of protein vertices. Additionally, considering the imbalanced distribution of samples in each category within the benchmark datasets, we introduced an Asymmetric Loss (ASL) function to further enhance the predictive performance of the method. Through evaluations on six benchmark test sets formed by three different dataset partitioning algorithms (Random, BFS, DFS), GNNGL-PPI outperformed the state-of-the-art multi-category prediction methods of PPI, as measured by the comprehensive performance evaluation metric F1-measure. Furthermore, interpretability analysis confirmed the effectiveness of GNNGL-PPI as a reliable multi-category prediction method for predicting protein-protein interactions.
BackgroundWe previously reported a modification of the CUT&Tag method (NTU-CAT) that allows genome-wide histone modification analysis in individual preimplantation embryos. In the present study, NTU-CAT was further simplified by taking advantage of the Well-of-the-Well (WOW) system, which enables the processing of multiple embryos in a shorter time with less reagent and cell loss during the procedure (WOW-CUT&Tag, WOW-CAT).ResultsWOW-CAT allowed histone modification profiling from not only a single blastocyst but also from a portion of it. WOW-CAT generated similar H3K4me3 profiles as NTU-CAT, but they were closer to the profiles produced by chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing, such as a valley-like trend and relatively lower false positive rates, indicating that WOW-CAT may attenuate the bias of Tn5 transposase to cut open chromatin regions. Simultaneous WOW-CAT of two halves of single blastocysts was conducted to analyze two different histone modifications (H3K4me3 and H3K27ac) within the same embryo. Furthermore, trophectoderm cells were biopsied and subjected to WOW-CAT in anticipation of preimplantation diagnosis of histone modifications. WOW-CAT allowed the monitoring of epigenetic modifications in the main body of the embryo. For example, analysis of H3K4me3 modifications of XIST and DDX3Y in trophectoderm biopsies could be used to sex embryos in combination with quantitative PCR, but without the need for deep sequencing.ConclusionsThese results suggest the applicability of WOW-CAT for flexible epigenetic analysis of individual embryos in preimplantation epigenetic diagnosis.
Background The genus Pseudoroegneria (Nevski) Love (Triticeae, Poaceae), whose genome symbol was designed as "St", accounts for more than 60% of perennial Triticeae species. The diploid species Psudoroegneria libanotica (2n = 14) contains the most ancient St genome, exhibited strong drought resistance, and was morphologically covered by cuticular wax on the aerial part. Therefore, the St-genome sequencing data could provide fundamental information for studies of genome evolution and reveal its mechanisms of cuticular wax and drought resistance. Results In this study, we reported the chromosome-level genome assembly for the St genome of Pse. libanotica, with a total size of 2.99 Gb. 46,369 protein-coding genes annotated and 71.62% was repeat sequences. Comparative analyses revealed that the genus Pseudoroegneria diverged during the middle and late Miocene. During this period, unique genes, gene family expansion, and contraction in Pse. libanotica were enriched in biotic and abiotic stresses, such as fatty acid biosynthesis which may greatly contribute to its drought adaption. Furthermore, we investigated genes associated with the cuticular wax formation and water deficit and found a new Kcs gene evm.TU.CTG175.54. It plays a critical role in the very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) elongation from C18 to C26 in Pse. libanotica. The function needs more evidence to be verified. Conclusions We sequenced and assembled the St genome in Triticeae and discovered a new KCS gene that plays a role in wax extension to cope with drought. Our study lays a foundation for the genome diversification of Triticeae species and deciphers cuticular wax formation genes involved in drought resistance.
BackgroundCircular RNAs (circRNAs) function as essential regulatory elements with pivotal roles in various biological processes. However, their expression profiles and functional regulation during the differentiation of goat myoblasts have not been thoroughly explored. This study conducts an analysis of circRNA expression profiles during the proliferation phase (cultured in growth medium, GM) and differentiation phase (cultured in differentiation medium, DM1/DM5) of skeletal muscle satellite cells (MuSCs) in goats.ResultsA total of 2,094 circRNAs were identified, among which 84 were differentially expressed as determined by pairwise comparisons across three distinct groups. Validation of the expression levels of six randomly selected circRNAs was performed using reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), with confirmation of their back-splicing junction sites. Enrichment analysis of the host genes associated with differentially expressed circRNAs (DEcircRNAs) indicated significant involvement in biological processes such as muscle contraction, muscle hypertrophy, and muscle tissue development. Additionally, these host genes were implicated in key signaling pathways, including Hippo, TGF-beta, and MAPK pathways. Subsequently, employing Cytoscape, we developed a circRNA-miRNA interaction network to elucidate the complex regulatory mechanisms underlying goat muscle development, encompassing 21 circRNAs and 47 miRNAs. Functional assays demonstrated that circTGF beta 2 enhances myogenic differentiation in goats, potentially through a miRNA sponge mechanism.ConclusionIn conclusion, we identified the genome-wide expression profiles of circRNAs in goat MuSCs during both proliferation and differentiation phases, and established that circTGF beta 2 plays a role in the regulation of myogenesis. This study offers a significant resource for the advanced exploration of the biological functions and mechanisms of circRNAs in the myogenesis of goats.
Background Heterosis has successfully enhanced maize productivity and quality. Although significant progress has been made in delineating the genetic basis of heterosis, the molecular mechanisms underlying its genetic components remain less explored. Allele-specific expression (ASE), the imbalanced expression between two parental alleles in hybrids, is increasingly being recognized as a factor contributing to heterosis. ASE is a complex process regulated by both epigenetic and genetic variations in response to developmental and environmental conditions.Results In this study, we explored the differential characteristics of ASE by analyzing the transcriptome data of two maize hybrids and their parents under four light conditions. On the basis of allele expression patterns in different hybrids under various conditions, ASE genes were divided into three categories: bias-consistent genes involved in basal metabolic processes in a functionally complementary manner, bias-reversal genes adapting to the light environment, and bias-specific genes maintaining cell homeostasis. We observed that 758 ASE genes (ASEGs) were significantly overlapped with heterosis quantitative trait loci (QTLs), and high-frequency variations in the promoter regions of heterosis-related ASEGs were identified between parents. In addition, 10 heterosis-related ASEGs participating in yield heterosis were selected during domestication.Conclusions The comprehensive analysis of ASEGs offers a distinctive perspective on how light quality influences gene expression patterns and gene-environment interactions, with implications for the identification of heterosis-related ASEGs to enhance maize yield.
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are crucial modulators of post-transcriptional gene expression regulation, cell fate determination, and disease development. However, lncRNA functions during short-term heat stress in adult worker bees are poorly understood. Here, we performed deep sequencing and bioinformatic analyses of honeybee lncRNAs. RNA interference was performed by using siRNA targeting the most highly expressed lncRNA. The silencing effect on lncRNA and the relative expression levels of seven heat shock protein (HSP) genes, were subsequently examined. Overall, 7,842 lncRNAs and 115 differentially expressed lncRNAs (DELs) were identified in adult worker bees following heat stress exposure. Structural analysis revealed that the overall expression abundance, length of transcripts, exon number, and open reading frames of lncRNAs were lower than those of mRNAs. GO analysis revealed that the target genes were mainly involved in "metabolism," "protein folding," "response to stress," and "signal transduction" pathways. KEGG analysis indicated that the "protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum" and "longevity regulating pathway-multiple species" pathways were most enriched. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) detection of the selected DELs confirmed the reliability of the sequencing data. Moreover, the siRNA experiment indicated that feeding siRNA yielded a silencing efficiency of 77.51% for lncRNA MSTRG.9645.5. Upon silencing this lncRNA, the expression levels of three HSP genes were significantly downregulated (p < 0.05), whereas those of three other HSP genes were significantly upregulated (p < 0.05). Our results provide a new perspective for understanding the regulatory mechanisms of lncRNAs in adult worker bees under short-term heat stress.
Colored leaves, a notable horticultural trait, have high research and ornamental value. The evergreen sweet olive (Osmanthus fragrans), one of the top ten traditional flowers in China, has been cultivated for more than two thousand years. However, in recent years, an increasing number of O. fragrans cultivars with colored leaves have been cultivated for their ornamental value. To study the molecular mechanism underlying the observed changes in leaf color, we selected O. fragrans 'Yinbi Shuanghui' (Y), which has yellow-white leaves, and O. fragrans 'Sijigui' (S), which has green leaves, as materials. Pigment content measurement showed that the chlorophyll, carotenoid and anthocyanin contents in Y were lower than in S. According to the SWATH-MS sequencing results, a total of 3,959 proteins were quantitatively identified, 1,300 of which were differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), including 782 up-regulated and 518 down-regulated proteins in Y compared to S. Functional enrichment analysis of DEPs revealed that down-regulated expression of photosynthesis related proteins may lead to the inhibition of chlorophyll synthesis in Y, this may be the main cause of leaf color change. Moreover, a protein interaction prediction model also showed that proteins such as PetC, PsbO, PsbP, and PsbQ were key proteins in the interaction network, and the up-regulated proteins participating in the anthocyanin and carotenoid pathways may be related to the formation of yellow-white leaves. Taken together, our findings represent the first SWATH-MS-based proteomic report on colored leaf O. fragrans and reveal that chlorophyll synthesis and secondary metabolism pathways contribute to the changes in leaf color.
This research aimed to investigate the effects of dietary fructooligosaccharides (FOS) on attenuating the Aeromonas hydrophila (A. hydrophila)-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis in blunt snout bream Megalobrama amblycephala. Fish were divided into three groups as follows: C1 (Control), T1 (A. hydrophila), and T2 (A. hydrophila + 4 g/kg FOS). The results showed that the activities of antioxidant enzymes increased, the liver morphology had disorderly arrangement, and extensive cell necrosis occurred because of A. hydrophila-infection. While the dietary FOS improved the above-mentioned liver damage. Additionaly, FOS elevated mRNA levels of pro-apoptotic molecules, including caspase-8 and 9, and down-regulated mRNA levels of the anti-apoptotic molecule Bcl-2, which is triggered by A. hydrophila-infection. The transcriptome analysis showed that the oxidative stress-related DEGs pathways were activated in intestine of blunt snout bream by A. hydrophila-infection. The FOS-added group led to the enrichment of more pathways to health. Further WGCNA co-expression network analysis showed that the screened single genes were clustered into 49 modules. The two modules with the highest association to the five traits (10 hub genes) were chosen to build the network by combining the physiological and biochemical characteristic. In summary, this research offers a foundation for the exploring of A. hydrophila-restoration genes in dietary FOS, and also lays a theoretical foundation for aquaculture in the future.
BackgroundViola diffusa is used in the formulation of various Traditional Chinese Medicines (TCMs), including antiviral, antimicrobial, antitussive, and anti-inflammatory drugs, due to its richness in flavonoids and triterpenoids. The biosynthesis of these compounds is largely mediated by cytochrome P450 enzymes, which are primarily located in the membranes of mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum.ResultsThis study presents the complete assembly of the mitogenome and plastome of Viola diffusa. The circular mitogenome spans 474,721 bp with a GC content of 44.17% and encodes 36 unique protein-coding genes, 21 tRNA, and 3 rRNA. Except for the RSCU values of 1 observed for the start codon (AUG) and tryptophan (UGG), the mitochondrial protein-coding genes exhibited a codon usage bias, with most estimates deviating from 1, similar to patterns observed in closely related species. Analysis of repetitive sequences in the mitogenome demonstrated potential homologous recombination mediated by these repeats. Sequence transfer analysis revealed 24 homologous sequences shared between the mitogenome and plastome, including nine full-length genes. Collinearity was observed among Viola diffusa species within the other members of Malpighiales order, indicated by the presence of homologous fragments. The length and arrangement of collinear blocks varied, and the mitogenome exhibited a high frequency of gene rearrangement.ConclusionsWe present the first complete assembly of the mitogenome and plastome of Viola diffusa, highlighting its implications for pharmacological, evolutionary, and taxonomic studies. Our research underscores the multifaceted importance of comprehensive mitogenome analysis.
Background Since domestication, both evolutionary forces and human selection have played crucial roles in producing adaptive and economic traits, resulting in animal breeds that have been selected for specific climates and different breeding goals. Pakistani goat breeds have acquired genomic adaptations to their native climate conditions, such as tropical and hot climates. In this study, using next-generation sequencing data, we aimed to assess the signatures of positive selection in three native Pakistani goats, known as milk production breeds, that have been well adapted to their local climate.Results To explore the genomic relationship between studied goat populations and their population structure, whole genome sequence data from native goat populations in Pakistan (n = 26) was merged with available worldwide goat genomic data (n = 184), resulting in a total dataset of 210 individuals. The results showed a high genetic correlation between Pakistani goats and samples from North-East Asia. Across all populations analyzed, a higher linkage disequilibrium (LD) level (- 0.59) was found in the Pakistani goat group at a genomic distance of 1 Kb. Our findings from admixture analysis (K = 5 and K = 6) showed no evidence of shared genomic ancestry between Pakistani goats and other goat populations from Asia. The results from genomic selection analysis revealed several candidate genes related to adaptation to tropical/hot climates (such as; KITLG, HSPB9, HSP70, HSPA12B, and HSPA12B) and milk production related-traits (such as IGFBP3, LPL, LEPR, TSHR, and ACACA) in Pakistani native goat breeds.Conclusions The results from this study shed light on the structural variation in the DNA of the three native Pakistani goat breeds. Several candidate genes were discovered for adaptation to tropical/hot climates, immune responses, and milk production traits. The identified genes could be exploited in goat breeding programs to select efficient breeds for tropical/hot climate regions.
BackgroundRecent advancements in spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) have opened up unprecedented opportunities to explore gene expression patterns within spatial contexts. Deciphering spatial domains is a critical task in spatial transcriptomic data analysis, aiding in the elucidation of tissue structural heterogeneity and biological functions. However, existing spatial domain detection methods ignore the consistency of expression patterns and spatial arrangements between spots, as well as the severe gene dropout phenomenon present in SRT data, resulting in suboptimal performance in identifying tissue spatial heterogeneity.ResultsIn this paper, we introduce a novel framework, spatially regularized deep graph networks (SR-DGN), which integrates gene expression profiles with spatial information to learn spatially-consistent and informative spot representations. Specifically, SR-DGN employs graph attention networks (GAT) to adaptively aggregate gene expression information from neighboring spots, considering local expression patterns between spots. In addition, the spatial regularization constraint ensures the consistency of neighborhood relationships between physical and embedded spaces in an end-to-end manner. SR-DGN also employs cross-entropy (CE) loss to model gene expression states, effectively mitigating the impact of noisy gene dropouts.ConclusionsExperimental results demonstrate that SR-DGN outperforms state-of-the-art methods in spatial domain identification across SRT data from different sequencing platforms. Moreover, SR-DGN is capable of recovering known microanatomical structures, yielding clearer low-dimensional visualizations and more accurate spatial trajectory inferences.
Recent studies have found a link between deep vein thrombosis and inflammatory reactions. N6-methyladenosine (m6A), a crucial element in immunological regulation, is believed to contribute to the pathophysiology of venous thromboembolism (VTE). However, how the m6A-modified immune microenvironment is involved in VTE remains unclear. In the present study, we identified a relationship between VTE and the expression of several m6A regulatory elements by analyzing peripheral blood samples from 177 patients with VTE and 88 healthy controls from public GEO databases GSE19151 and GSE48000. We used machine learning to identify essential genes and constructed a diagnostic model for VTE using multivariate logistic regression. Unsupervised cluster analysis revealed a marked difference between m6A modification patterns in terms of immune cell infiltration, inflammatory reactivity, and autophagy. We identified two m6A-related autophagy genes (i.e., CHMP2B and SIRT1) and the crucial m6A regulator YTHDF3 using bioinformatics. We also examined two potential mechanisms through which YTHDF3 may affect VTE. m6A modification, immunity, and autophagy are closely linked in VTE, offering novel mechanistic and therapeutic insights.
Background The domain of unknown function 247 (DUF247) proteins is involved in plant development and stress response. Rice is an important worldwide cereal crop, although an increasing number of DUF proteins have been identified, the understanding of DUF proteins is still very limited in rice. Results In this study, we identified 69 genes that encode DUF247 proteins in the rice (Oryza sativa) genome by homology searches and domain prediction. All the OsDUF247 proteins were classified into four major groups (I, II, III and IV) by phylogenetic analysis. Remarkably, OsDUF247 genes clustered on the chromosomes solely show close phylogenetic relationships, suggesting that gene duplications have driven the expansion of the DUF247 gene family in the rice genome. Tissue profile analysis showed that most DUF247 genes expressed at constitutive levels in seedlings, roots, stems, and leaves, except for seven genes (LOC_Os01g21670, LOC_Os03g19700, LOC_Os05g04060, LOC_Os08g26820, LOC_Os08g26840, LOC_Os08g26850 and LOC_Os09g13410) in panicles. These seven genes were induced by various abiotic stress, including cold, drought, heat, hormone treatment, and especially salt, as demonstrated by further experimental analysis. DUF247 proteins contain transmembrane domains located on the membrane, suggesting their significant roles in rice development and adaptation to the environment. Conclusions These findings lay the foundation for functional characterizations of DUF247 genes to unravel their exact role in rice cultivars.
Rapeseed (Brassica napus L.), accounts for nearly 16% of vegetable oil, is the world's second produced oilseed. However, pod shattering has caused significant yield loses in rapeseed production, particularly during mechanical harvesting. The GH28 genes can promote pod shattering by changing the structure of the pod cell wall in Arabidopsis. However, the role of the GH28 gene family in rapeseed was largely unknown. Therefore, a genome-wide comprehensive analysis was conducted to classify the role of GH28 gene family on rapeseed pod shattering. A total of 37 BnaGH28 genes in the rapeseed genome were identified. These BnaGH28s can be divided into five groups (Group A-E), based on phylogenetic and synteny analysis. Protein property, gene structure, conserved motif, cis-acting element, and gene expression profile of BnaGH28 genes in the same group were similar. Specially, the expression level of genes in group A-D was gradually decreased, but increased in group E with the development of silique. Among eleven higher expressed genes in group E, two BnaGH28 genes (BnaA07T0199500ZS and BnaC06T0206500ZS) were significantly regulated by IAA or GA treatment. And the significant effects of BnaA07T0199500ZS variation on pod shattering resistance were also demonstrated in present study. These results could open a new window for insight into the role of BnaGH28 genes on pod shattering resistance in rapeseed.
BackgroundBreeding polled goats is a welfare-friendly approach for horn removal in comparison to invasive methods. To gain a comprehensive understanding of the genetic basis underlying polledness in goats, we conducted whole-genome sequencing of 106 Xinong Saanen dairy goats, including 33 horned individuals, 70 polled individuals, and 3 polled intersexuality syndrome (PIS) individuals.MethodsThe present study employed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) and linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis to precisely map the genetic locus underlying the polled phenotype in goats.ResultsThe analysis conducted in our study revealed a total of 320 genome-wide significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with the horned/polled phenotype in goats. These SNPs exhibited two distinct peaks on chromosome 1, spanning from 128,817,052 to 133,005,441 bp and from 150,336,143 to 150,808,639 bp. The present study identified three genome-wide significant SNPs, namely Chr1:129789816, Chr1:129791507, and Chr1:129791577, as potential markers of PIS-affected goats. The results of our LD analysis suggested a potential association between MRPS22 and infertile intersex individuals, as well as a potential association between ERG and the polled trait in goats.ConclusionWe have successfully identified three marker SNPs closely linked to PIS, as well as several candidate genes associated with the polled trait in goats. These results may contribute to the development of SNP chips for early prediction of PIS in goats, thereby facilitating breeding programs aimed at producing fertile herds with polled traits.
Background R2R3-MYB transcription factors belong to one of the largest gene subfamilies in plants, and they are involved in diverse biological processes. However, the role of R2R3-MYB transcription factor subfamily genes in the response of rice (Oryza sativa L.) to salt stress has been rarely reported. Results In this study, we performed a genome-wide characterization and expression identification of rice R2R3-MYB transcription factor subfamily genes. We identified a total of 117 R2R3-MYB genes in rice and characterized their gene structure, chromosomal location, and cis-regulatory elements. According to the phylogenetic relationships and amino acid sequence homologies, the R2R3-MYB genes were divided into four groups. qRT-PCR of the R2R3-MYB genes showed that the expression levels of 10 genes significantly increased after 3 days of 0.8% NaCl treatment. We selected a high expression gene OsMYB2-115 for further analysis. OsMYB2-115 was highly expressed in the roots, stem, leaf, and leaf sheath. OsMYB2-115 was found to be localized in the nucleus, and the yeast hybrid assay showed that OsMYB2-115 has transcriptional activation activity. Conclusion This result provides important information for the functional analyses of rice R2R3-MYB transcription factor subfamily genes related to the salt stress response and reveals that OsMYB2-115 may be an important gene associated with salt tolerance in rice.
Background Camellia sasanqua Thunb. is an essential woody ornamental plant. Our continuous observation found that scale insects often infest C. sasanqua all year round in Kunming, China, resulting in poor growth. Scientifically preventing and controlling the infestation of scale insects should be paid attention to, and the mechanism of scale insects influencing C. sasanqua should be used as the research basis. Results The scale insect was identified as Pseudaulacaspis sasakawai Takagi. We analyzed transcriptome sequencing data from leaves of C. sasanqua infested with scale insects. A total of 1320 genes were either up-regulated or down-regulated and differed significantly in response to scale insects. GO (Gene Ontology) annotation analysis showed that the pathway of catalytic activity, binding, membrane part, cell part, and cellular process were affected. KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway analysis showed that most DEGs (differentially expressed genes) involved in plant hormone signal transduction, MAPK signaling pathway, flavonoid biosynthesis, tropane, piperidine and pyridine alkaloid biosynthesis. We also observed that the expression of galactose metabolism and carotenoid biosynthesis were significantly influenced. In addition, qRT-PCR (quantitative real-time PCR) validated the expression patterns of DEGs, which showed an excellent agreement with the transcriptome sequencing. Conclusions Our transcriptomic analysis revealed that the C. sasanqua had an intricate resistance strategy to cope with scale insect attacks. After sensing the attack signal of scale insects, C. sasanqua activated the early signal MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) to activate further transcription factors and Auxin, ET, JA, ABA, and other plant hormone signaling pathways, ultimately leading to the accumulation of lignin, scopolin, flavonoids and other secondary metabolites, produces direct and indirect resistance to scale insects. Our results suggested that it provided some potential resources of defense genes that would benefit the following resistance breeding in C. sasanqua to scale insects.
Background Spermatogenesis is a highly regulated and complex process in which DNA methylation plays a crucial role. This study aimed to explore the differential methylation profiles in sperm DNA between patients with asthenospermia (AS) and healthy controls (HCs), those with oligoasthenospermia (OAS) and HCs, and patients with AS and those with OAS.Results Semen samples and clinical data were collected from five patients with AS, five patients with OAS, and six age-matched HCs. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) was performed to identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in sperm cells among the different types of patients and HCs. A total of 6520, 28,019, and 16,432 DMRs were detected between AS and HC, OAS and HC, and AS and OAS groups, respectively. These DMRs were predominantly located within gene bodies and mapped to 2868, 9296, and 9090 genes in the respective groups. Of note, 12, 9, and 8 DMRs in each group were closely associated with spermatogenesis and male infertility. Furthermore, BDNF, SMARCB1, PIK3CA, and DDX27; RBMX and SPATA17; ASZ1, CDH1, and CHDH were identified as strong differentially methylated candidate genes in each group, respectively. Meanwhile, the GO analysis of DMR-associated genes in the AS vs. HC groups revealed that protein binding, cytoplasm, and transcription (DNA-templated) were the most enriched terms in the biological process (BP), cellular component (CC), and molecular function (MF), respectively. Likewise, in both the OAS vs. HC and AS vs. OAS groups, GO analysis revealed protein binding, nucleus, and transcription (DNA-templated) as the most enriched terms in BP, CC, and MF, respectively. Finally, the KEGG analysis of DMR-annotated genes and these genes at promoters suggested that metabolic pathways were the most significantly associated across all three groups.Conclusions The current study results revealed distinctive sperm DNA methylation patterns in the AS vs. HC and OAS vs. HC groups, particularly between patients with AS and those with OAS. The identification of key genes associated with spermatogenesis and male infertility in addition to the differentially enriched metabolic pathways may contribute to uncovering the potential pathogenesis in different types of abnormal sperm parameters.
Background Auxin/induced-3-acetic acid (Aux/IAA) is an important plant hormone that affects plant growth and resistance to abiotic stresses. Drought stress is a vital factor in reducing plant biomass yield and production quality. Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) is the most widely planted leguminous forage and one of the most economically valuable crops in the world. Aux/IAA is one of the early responsive gene families of auxin, playing a crucial role in response to drought stress. However, the characteristics of the Aux/IAA gene family in alfalfa and its potential function in response to drought stress are still unknown. Result A total of 41 Aux/IAA gene members were identified in alfalfa genome. The physicochemical, peptide structure, secondary and tertiary structure analysis of proteins encoded by these genes revealed functional diversity of the MsIAA gene. A phylogenetic analysis classified the MsIAA genes into I-X classes in two subgroups. And according to the gene domain structure, these genes were classified into typical MsIAA and atypical MsIAA. Gene structure analysis showed that the MsIAA genes contained 1-4 related motifs, and except for the third chromosome without MsIAAs, they were all located on 7 chromosomes. The gene duplication analysis revealed that segmental duplication and tandem duplication greatly affected the amplification of the MsIAA genes. Analysis of the Ka/Ks ratio of duplicated MsAux/IAA genes suggested purification selection pressure was high and functional differences were limited. In addition, identification and classification of promoter cis-elements elucidated that MsIAA genes contained numerous elements associated to phytohormone response and abiotic stress response. The prediction protein-protein interaction network showed that there was a complex interaction between the MsAux/IAA genes. Gene expression profiles were tissue-specific, and MsAux/IAA had a broad response to both common abiotic stress (ABA, salt, drought and cold) and heavy metal stress (Al and Pb). Furthermore, the expression patterns analysis of 41 Aux/IAA genes by the quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) showed that Aux/IAA genes can act as positive or negative factors to regulate the drought resistance in alfalfa. Conclusion This study provides useful information for the alfalfa auxin signaling gene families and candidate evidence for further investigation on the role of Aux/IAA under drought stress. Future studies could further elucidate the functional mechanism of the MsIAA genes response to drought stress.
BackgroundNilaparvata lugens is one of the most destructive pests of rice. RNAi-based N. lugens control offers one alternative strategy to traditional chemical insecticides. However, selection of potential target for RNAi against N. lugens remains a major challenge. Only two target genes for nuclear transgenic N. lugens-resistant plants have been screened. Importantly, only one or few potential target genes against N. lugens were screened every time by knowledge of essential genes from model organisms in previous study.ResultsHere, in silico genome-wide selection of potential target genes against N. lugens through homology comparison was performed. Through genome synteny comparisons, about 3.5% of Drosophila melanogaster genome was found to have conserved genomic synteny with N. lugens genome. By using N. lugens proteins to search D. melanogaster homologs defining lethal or sterile phenotype, 358 N. lugens genes were first screened as putative target genes. Transgenic rice lines expressing dsRNA of randomly selected gene (NlRan or NlSRP54) from 358 putative target genes enhanced resistance to N. lugens. After expression check and safety check, 115 N. lugens genes were screened as potential target candidates.ConclusionThe combined efforts in this study firstly provide one in silico genome-wide homology-based screening approach for RNAi-based target genes against N. lugens, which not only offer one new opportunity to batch select potential target candidates in pests of interest, but also will facilitate the selection of RNAi target in many pest species by providing more than one hundred potential target candidates.
BackgroundThe pathogenesis of vitiligo remains unclear. The genes encoding vitiligo-related RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and their underlying pathogenic mechanism have not been determined.ResultsSingle-cell transcriptome sequencing (scRNA-seq) data from the CNCB database was obtained to identify distinct cell types and subpopulations and the relative proportion changes in vitiligo and healthy samples. We identified 14 different cell types and 28 cell subpopulations. The proportion of each cell subpopulation significantly differed between the patients with vitiligo and healthy groups. Using RBP genes for unsupervised clustering, we obtained the specific RBP genes of different cell types in vitiligo and healthy groups. The RBP gene expression was highly heterogeneous; there were significant differences in some cell types, such as keratinocytes, Langerhans, and melanocytes, while there were no significant differences in other cells, such as T cells and fibroblasts, in the two groups. The melanocyte-specific RBP genes were enriched in the apoptosis and immune-related pathways in the patients with vitiligo. Combined with the bulk RNA-seq data of melanocytes, key RBP genes related to melanocytes were identified, including eight upregulated RBP genes (CDKN2A, HLA-A, RPL12, RPL29, RPL31, RPS19, RPS21, and RPS28) and one downregulated RBP gene (SLC3A2). Cell experiments were conducted to explore the role of the key RBP gene SLC3A2 in vitiligo. Cell experiments confirmed that melanocyte proliferation decreased, whereas apoptosis increased, after SLC3A2 knockdown. SLC3A2 knockdown in melanocytes also decreased the SOD activity and melanin content; increased the Fe2+, ROS, and MDA content; significantly increased the expression levels of TYR and COX2; and decreased the expression levels of glutathione and GPX4.ConclusionWe identified the RBP genes of different cell subsets in patients with vitiligo and confirmed that downregulating SLC3A2 can promote ferroptosis in melanocytes. These findings provide new insights into the pathogenesis of vitiligo.
BackgroundAmpelopsideae J. Wen & Z.L. Nie is a small-sized tribe of Vitaceae Juss., including ca. 47 species from four genera showing a disjunct distribution worldwide across all the continents except Antarctica. There are numerous species from the tribe that are commonly used as medicinal plants with immune-modulating, antimicrobial, and anti-hypertensive properties. The tribe is usually recognized into three clades, i.e., Ampelopsis Michx., Nekemias Raf., and the Southern Hemisphere clade. However, the relationships of the three clades differ greatly between the nuclear and the plastid topologies. There has been limited exploration of the chloroplast phylogenetic relationships within Ampelopsideae, and studies on the chloroplast genome structure of this tribe are only available for a few individuals. In this study, we aimed to investigate the evolutionary characteristics of plastid genomes of the tribe, including their genome structure and evolutionary insights.ResultsWe sequenced, assembled, and annotated plastid genomes of 36 species from the tribe and related taxa in the family. Three main clades were recognized within Ampelopsideae, corresponding to Ampelopsis, Nekemias, and the Southern Hemisphere lineage, respectively, and all with 100% bootstrap supports. The genome sequences and content of the tribe are highly conserved. However, comparative analyses suggested that the plastomes of Nekemias demonstrate a contraction in the large single copy region and an expansion in the inverted repeat region, and possess a high number of forward and palindromic repeat sequences distinct from both Ampelopsis and the Southern Hemisphere taxa.ConclusionsOur results highlighted plastome variations in genome length, expansion or contraction of the inverted repeat region, codon usage bias, and repeat sequences, are corresponding to the three lineages of the tribe, which probably faced with different environmental selection pressures and evolutionary history. This study provides valuable insights into understanding the evolutionary patterns of plastid genomes within the Ampelopsideae of Vitaceae.
Background Lycium is an economically and ecologically important genus of shrubs, consisting of approximately 70 species distributed worldwide, 15 of which are located in China. Despite the economic and ecological importance of Lycium, its phylogeny, interspecific relationships, and evolutionary history remain relatively unknown. In this study, we constructed a phylogeny and estimated divergence time based on the chloroplast genomes (CPGs) of 15 species, including subspecies, of the genus Lycium from China. Results We sequenced and annotated 15 CPGs in this study. Comparative analysis of these genomes from these Lycium species revealed a typical quadripartite structure, with a total sequence length ranging from 154,890 to 155,677 base pairs (bp). The CPGs was highly conserved and moderately differentiated. Through annotation, we identified a total of 128-132 genes. Analysis of the boundaries of inverted repeat (IR) regions showed consistent positioning: the junctions of the IRb/LSC region were located in rps19 in all Lycium species, IRb/SSC between the ycf1 and ndhF genes, and SSC/IRa within the ycf1 gene. Sequence variation in the SSC region exceeded that in the IR region. We did not detect major expansions or contractions in the IR region or rearrangements or insertions in the CPGs of the 15 Lycium species. Comparative analyses revealed five hotspot regions in the CPG: trnR(UCU), atpF-atpH, ycf3-trnS(GGA), trnS(GGA), and trnL-UAG, which could potentially serve as molecular markers. In addition, phylogenetic tree construction based on the CPG indicated that the 15 Lycium species formed a monophyletic group and were divided into two typical subbranches and three minor branches. Molecular dating suggested that Lycium diverged from its sister genus approximately 17.7 million years ago (Mya) and species diversification within the Lycium species of China primarily occurred during the recent Pliocene epoch. Conclusion The divergence time estimation presented in this study will facilitate future research on Lycium, aid in species differentiation, and facilitate diverse investigations into this economically and ecologically important genus.
Background Previous studies have shown that protein kinase MoKin1 played an important role in the growth, conidiation, germination and pathogenicity in rice blast fungus, Magnaporthe oryzae. Delta Mokin1 mutant showed significant phenotypic defects and significantly reduced pathogenicity. However, the internal mechanism of how MoKin1 affected the development of physiology and biochemistry remained unclear in M. oryzae. Result This study adopted a multi-omics approach to comprehensively analyze MoKin1 function, and the results showed that MoKin1 affected the cellular response to endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress). Proteomic analysis revealed that the downregulated proteins in Delta Mokin1 mutant were enriched mainly in the response to ER stress triggered by the unfolded protein. Loss of MoKin1 prevented the ER stress signal from reaching the nucleus. Therefore, the phosphorylation of various proteins regulating the transcription of ER stress-related genes and mRNA translation was significantly downregulated. The insensitivity to ER stress led to metabolic disorders, resulting in a significant shortage of carbohydrates and a low energy supply, which also resulted in severe phenotypic defects in Delta Mokin1 mutant. Analysis of MoKin1-interacting proteins indicated that MoKin1 really took participate in the response to ER stress. Conclusion Our results showed the important role of protein kinase MoKin1 in regulating cellular response to ER stress, providing a new research direction to reveal the mechanism of MoKin1 affecting pathogenic formation, and to provide theoretical support for the new biological target sites searching and bio-pesticides developing.
BackgroundAmidst the escalating loss of global biodiversity, freshwater mussels (family Unionidae) have become one of the most imperiled animal groups. Acquiring more biological and phylogenetic information on understudied taxa constitutes a pivotal aspect of conservation biology. Consequently, a comprehensive examination was conducted on Koreosolenaia, Parvasolenaia, and Sinosolenaia from China encompassing morphology, anatomy, distribution, and molecular systematics to provide theoretical support for future species endangerment assessments and biodiversity conservation.ResultsThe shell characteristics of Koreosolenaia, Parvasolenaia, and Sinosolenaia were clearly distinct, and the soft-body morphology could also be easily distinguished from each other. The papillae of the incurrent aperture of Sinosolenaia iridinea, Sinosolenaia recognita, and Sinosolenaia oleivora, which were previously described as difficult, exhibited significant variations that could be utilized for species diagnosis. Furthermore, both incurrent and excurrent apertures of the Sinosolenaia species had small cysts on their dorsal surfaces which may be unique to this particular group. Comparative analysis of six mitochondrial genomes (Parvasolenaia rivularis, Koreosolenaia sitgyensis, Sinosolenaia iridinea, Sinosolenaia recognita, Sinosolenaia carinata, and Sinosolenaia oleivora) revealed a completely consistent gene arrangement pattern. Additionally, there was a high consistency in nucleotide base content and skewness, amino acid usage, and relative synonymous codon usage among the six complete mitochondrial genomes. Mitochondrial phylogenomics of these genomes with additional taxa within Gonideinae robustly supported the generic relationships as follows: (Inversidens + ((Microcondylaea + Sinosolenaia) + (Parvasolenaia + (Koreosolenaia + (Ptychorhynchus + (Postolata + Cosmopseudodon)))))).ConclusionsThe present study provided significant data on the shell morphology and soft-body anatomy of Koreosolenaia, Parvasolenaia, and Sinosolenaia, thereby clarifying the diagnostic characteristics for these challenging taxa. Additionally, we established a robust phylogenetic framework at both the generic and species levels based on mitochondrial genomics.
Panax ginseng is an important medicinal plant in China and is classified into two types: cultivated ginseng (CFCG) and mountain-cultivated ginseng (MCG). The two types of genetic varieties are the same, but the growth environments and management practices are different, resulting in substantial differences in their taproot morphology. Currently, there is a paucity of research on the internal mechanisms that regulate the phenotypic differences between cultivated ginseng and mountain-cultivated ginseng. In this study, we explored the potential mechanisms underlying their phenotypic differences using transcriptomic and metabolomic techniques. The results indicate that the taproot thickening of CFCG was significantly greater than that of MCG. Compared with MCG-4, MCG-10, and MCG-18, the diameters of the taproots of CFCG-4 increased by 158.96, 81.57, and 43.21%, respectively. Additionally, the contents of sucrose and starch in the taproot, as well as TRA and DHZR, were markedly elevated. Transcriptome analysis revealed that compared with MCG of different age groups, genes associated with starch and sucrose metabolism pathways (PgSUS1, PgSPS1, PgSPS3, and PgglgC1) were significantly upregulated in CFCG-4, whereas genes involved in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway (PgPER3, PgPER51, and PgPER12) were significantly downregulated in CFCG-4. This imbalance in the metabolic pathways suggests that these genes play crucial roles in ginseng taproot thickening. PgbHLH130 and PgARF18 may be key regulators of transcriptional changes in these pathways. These findings elucidate the molecular mechanisms governing ginseng taproot thickening, and have important implications for enhancing the overall quality and value of ginseng.
Background Terniopsis yongtaiensis, a member of the Podostemaceae family, is an aquatic flowering plant displaying remarkable adaptive traits that enable survival in submerged, turbulent habitats. Despite the progressive expansion of chloroplast genomic information within this family, mitochondrial genome sequences have yet to be reported. Results In current study, the mitochondrial genome of the T. yongtaiensis was characterized by a circular genome of 426,928 bp encoding 31 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 18 tRNAs, and 3 rRNA genes. Our comprehensive analysis focused on gene content, repeat sequences, RNA editing processes, intracellular gene transfer, phylogeny, and codon usage bias. Numerous repeat sequences were identified, including 130 simple sequence repeats, 22 tandem repeats, and 220 dispersed repeats. Phylogenetic analysis positioned T. yongtaiensis (Podostemaceae) within the Malpighiales order, showing a close relationship with the Calophyllaceae family, which was consistent with the APG IV classification. A comparative analysis with nine other Malpighiales species revealed both variable and conserved regions, providing insights into the genomic evolution within this order. Notably, the GC content of T. yongtaiensis was distinctively lower compared to other Malpighilales, primarily due to variations in non-coding regions and specific protein-coding genes, particularly the nad genes. Remarkably, the number of RNA editing sites was low (276), distributed unevenly across 27 PCGs. The dN/dS analysis showed only the ccmB gene of T. yongtaiensis was positively selected, which plays a crucial role in cytochrome c biosynthesis. Additionally, there were 13 gene-containing homologous regions between the mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of T. yongtaiensis, suggesting the gene transfer events between these organellar genomes. Conclusions This study assembled and annotated the first mitochondrial genome of the Podostemaceae family. The comparison results of mitochondrial gene composition, GC content, and RNA editing sites provided novel insights into the adaptive traits and genetic reprogramming of this aquatic eudicot group and offered a foundation for future research on the genomic evolution and adaptive mechanisms of Podostemaceae and related plant families in the Malpighiales order.
Background Auxin transcription factor (ARF) is an important transcription factor that transmits auxin signals and is involved in plant growth and development as well as stress response. However, genome-wide identification and responses to abiotic and pathogen stresses of the ARF gene family in Cucurbita pepo L, especially pathogen stresses, have not been reported. Results Finally, 33 ARF genes (CpARF01 to CpARF33) were identified in C.pepo from the Cucurbitaceae genome database using bioinformatics methods. The putative protein contains 438 to 1071 amino acids, the isoelectric point is 4.99 to 8.54, and the molecular weight is 47759.36 to 117813.27 Da, the instability index ranged from 40.74 to 68.94, and the liposoluble index ranged from 62.56 to 76.18. The 33 genes were mainly localized in the nucleus and cytoplasm, and distributed on 16 chromosomes unevenly. Phylogenetic analysis showed that 33 CpARF proteins were divided into 6 groups. According to the amino acid sequence of CpARF proteins, 10 motifs were identified, and 1,3,6,8,10 motifs were highly conserved in most of the CpARF proteins. At the same time, it was found that genes in the same subfamily have similar gene structures. Cis-elements and protein interaction networks predicted that CpARF may be involved in abiotic factors related to the stress response. QRT-PCR analysis showed that most of the CpARF genes were upregulated under NaCl, PEG, and pathogen treatment compared to the control. Subcellular localization showed that CpARF22 was localized in the nucleus. The transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana lines with the CpARF22 gene enhanced their tolerance to salt and drought stress. Conclusion In this study, we systematically analyzed the CpARF gene family and its expression patterns under drought, salt, and pathogen stress, which improved our understanding of the ARF protein of zucchini, and laid a solid foundation for functional analysis of the CpARF gene.
BackgroundThe Plant-specific AP2/ERF gene family encodes proteins involved in various biological and physiological processes. Although the genome of Coptis chinensis Franch, a plant producing benzylisoquinoline alkaloids (BIAs), has been sequenced at the chromosome level, studies on the AP2/ERF gene family in C. chinensis are lacking. Thus, a genome-wide identification of AP2/ERF gene family in C. chinensis was conducted to explore its role in BIAs biosynthesis. ResultsA total of 96 CcAP2/ERF genes were identified and categorized into five subfamilies, including 43 ERFs, 32 DREBs, 17 AP2s, 3 RAVs, and 1 Soloist, based on their structural domains. These CcAP2/ERF genes were unevenly distributed across nine chromosomes. Analysis of gene duplication events identified 17 CcAP2/ERF gene pairs in the genome, with 7 involved in tandem duplication events and 10 involved in segmental duplicate events, indicating that both types of duplications contributed to the expansion of the AP2/ERF gene family. The Ka/Ks ratio analysis suggested that the CcAP2/ERF gene family underwent strong purifying selection. Two phytohormones, methyl jasmonate and abscisic acid, were identified as potential key inducers of BIAs biosynthesis due to the cis-acting element prediction. Analysis of the spatial transcriptomic data revealed that 28 differentially expressed AP2/ERF genes had the highest or relatively higher expression levels in the rhizome, 17 of which positively correlated with the tissue-specific accumulation of BIAs. Further real-time PCR verification and protein-protein interaction analysis indicated that DREB1B might be one of the central regulators in a highly complex BIAs biosynthesis network. ConclusionThese findings provide significant insight into the function of AP2/ERF genes in C. chinensis, particularly in the regulatory network of BIAs biosynthesis in C. chinensis. This study also identifies candidate genes for metabolic engineering to increase BIAs content in C. chinensis.
BackgroundDorper sheep are celebrated for their fast maturation and superior meat quality, with some shedding their wool each spring. Wool shedding occurs naturally due to the hair follicle (HF) cycle, but its regulatory mechanisms remain unclear and need further investigation.ResultsIn this study, shedding and non-shedding sheep were selected from the same Dorper flock. Skin samples were collected in September of the first year and January and March of the following years. RNA sequencing was performed on these samples. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to assess the results. A total of 2536 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. Using a clustering heatmap and fuzzy clustering analysis three distinct gene expression patterns were identified: A pattern (high expression in anagen), T1 pattern, and T2 pattern (high expression in telogen). For each pattern, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were analyzed through Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses. Combining this with pathway expression analysis, six A-pattern and fourteen T-pattern pathways linked to telogen-anagen transition in the HF cycle were identified. Networks of key pathways were then constructed. Additionally, key genes were identified in the telogen-anagen transition, including one A-pattern gene and seven T-pattern (T1, 1; T2, 6) genes, using the Maximal Clique Centrality (MCC) tool in Cytoscape. Predicted transcription factors (TFs) involved in key pathways, such as LEF and STAT5B, were identified. Finally, RNA-seq results were confirmed by RT-qPCR.ConclusionThis study highlights critical genes and pathways in the telogen-anagen transition, and transcriptome sequencing along with bioinformatics analysis provides new insights into the regulatory mechanisms of the HF cycle and development.
Background Protein phosphatases type 2C (PP2C) are heavily involved in plant growth and development, hormone-related signaling pathways and the response of various biotic and abiotic stresses. However, a comprehensive report identifying the genome-scale of PP2C gene family in ginger is yet to be published.Results In this study, 97 ZoPP2C genes were identified based on the ginger genome. These genes were classified into 15 branches (A-O) according to the phylogenetic analysis and distributed unevenly on 11 ginger chromosomes. The proteins mainly functioned in the nucleus. Similar motif patterns and exon/intron arrangement structures were identified in the same subfamily of ZoPP2Cs. Collinearity analysis indicated that ZoPP2Cs had 33 pairs of fragment duplicated events uniformly distributed on the corresponding chromosomes. Furthermore, ZoPP2Cs showed greater evolutionary proximity to banana's PP2Cs. The forecast of cis-regulatory elements and transcription factor binding sites demonstrated that ZoPP2Cs participate in ginger growth, development, and responses to hormones and stresses. ZoERFs have plenty of binding sites of ZoPP2Cs, suggesting a potential synergistic contribution between ZoERFs and ZoPP2Cs towards regulating growth/development and adverse conditions. The protein-protein interaction network displayed that five ZoPP2Cs (9/23/26/49/92) proteins have robust interaction relationship and potential function as hub proteins. Furthermore, the RNA-Seq and qRT-PCR analyses have shown that ZoPP2Cs exhibit various expression patterns during ginger maturation and responses to environmental stresses such as chilling, drought, flooding, salt, and Fusarium solani. Notably, exogenous application of melatonin led to notable up-regulation of ZoPP2Cs (17/59/11/72/43) under chilling stress.Conclusions Taken together, our investigation provides significant insights of the ginger PP2C gene family and establishes the groundwork for its functional validation and genetic engineering applications.
BackgroundVibrio parahaemolyticus has emerged as the leading cause of seafood-associated infections worldwide. Previous studies have shown that V. parahaemolyticus can be detected in both environmental and clinical samples. However, the molecular characteristics of V. parahaemolyticus isolated from these sources remain unknown.ResultsThis study examined 128 strains of V. parahaemolyticus isolated from clinical and environmental samples collected between 2020 and 2023 in Huzhou, China. We identified 73 serotypes; O10:K4, O3:K6, and O4:KUT were the dominant serotypes among clinical isolates. We examined the proliferation and motility of major epidemic strains from environmental and clinical samples. Genetic diversity and evolution were assessed by average nucleotide identity (ANI), phylogenetic tree construction, and multilocus sequence typing (MLST). Furthermore, we identified 13 novel sequence types (STs) among the environmental isolates, indicating that V. parahaemolyticus strains are widely distributed and evolve rapidly in the environment in Huzhou, China. We found 206 virulence genes among these isolates, indicating that environmental isolates possess numerous virulence genes. Additionally, we detected 4 strains carrying the tdh or trh gene, which may increase their pathogenicity. The prediction results of antibiotic resistance genes shown that environmental isolates may carry up to 104 resistance genes, compared to 30 in clinical isolates.ConclusionsWe observed that the environmental serotypes of V. parahaemolyticus exhibit greater diversity compared to clinical isolates, which are predominantly concentrated in three major serotypes. Furthermore, a considerable genetic distance was found between most clinical and environmental isolates. Notably, some clinical isolates show a closer genetic proximity to environmental isolates. Additionally, the distribution of virulence genes, specifically T3SS and tdh, significantly differs among isolates from these two distinct sources. The prediction results for antibiotic resistance genes suggest that environmental isolates may harbor a broader spectrum of resistance genes. The findings of this study provide new insights into the phylogenetic relationships between V. parahaemolyticus strains from clinical and environmental sources, and they enhance the MLST database.
BackgroundBrain diseases pose a significant threat to human health, and various network-based methods have been proposed for identifying gene biomarkers associated with these diseases. However, the brain is a complex system, and extracting topological semantics from different brain networks is necessary yet challenging to identify pathogenic genes for brain diseases.ResultsIn this study, we present a multi-network representation learning framework called M-GBBD for the identification of gene biomarker in brain diseases. Specifically, we collected multi-omics data to construct eleven networks from different perspectives. M-GBBD extracts the spatial distributions of features from these networks and iteratively optimizes them using Kullback-Leibler divergence to fuse the networks into a common semantic space that represents the gene network for the brain. Subsequently, a graph consisting of both gene and large-scale disease proximity networks learns representations through graph convolution techniques and predicts whether a gene is associated which brain diseases while providing associated scores. Experimental results demonstrate that M-GBBD outperforms several baseline methods. Furthermore, our analysis supported by bioinformatics revealed CAMP as a significantly associated gene with Alzheimer's disease identified by M-GBBD.ConclusionCollectively, M-GBBD provides valuable insights into identifying gene biomarkers for brain diseases and serves as a promising framework for brain networks representation learning.
Background The health and size of the testes are crucial for boar fertility. Testicular development is tightly regulated by epigenetics. N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification is a prevalent internal modification on mRNA and plays an important role in development. The mRNA m6A methylation in boar testicular development still needs to be investigated.Results Using the MeRIP-seq technique, we identify and profile m6A modification in boar testes between piglets and adults. The results showed 7783 distinct m6A peaks in piglets and 6590 distinct m6A peaks in adults, with 2,471 peaks shared between the two groups. Enrichment of GO and KEGG analysis reveal dynamic m6A methylation in various biological processes and signalling pathways. Meanwhile, we conjointly analyzed differentially methylated and expressed genes in boar testes before and after sexual maturity, and reproductive related genes (TLE4, TSSK3, TSSK6, C11ORF94, PATZ1, PHLPP1 and PAQR7) were identified. Functional enrichment analysis showed that differential genes are associated with important biological functions, including regulation of growth and development, regulation of metabolic processes and protein catabolic processes.Conclusion The results demonstrate that m6A methylation, differential expression and the related signalling pathways are crucial for boar testicular development. These results suggest a role for m6A modification in boar testicular development and provided a resource for future studies on m6A function in boar testicular development.
BackgroundTransforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) superfamily genes can regulate various processes, especially in embryogenesis, adult development, and homeostasis. To understand the evolution and divergence patterns of the TGF-beta superfamily in scallops, genome-wide data from the Bay scallop (Argopecten irradians), the Zhikong scallop (Chlamys farreri) and the Yesso scallop (Mizuhopecten yessoensis) were systematically analysed using bioinformatics methods.ResultsTwelve members of the TGF-beta superfamily were identified for each scallop. The phylogenetic tree showed that these genes were grouped into 11 clusters, including BMPs, ADMP, NODAL, GDF, activin/inhibin and AMH. The number of exons and the conserved motif showed some differences between different clusters, while genes in the same cluster exhibited high similarity. Selective pressure analysis revealed that the TGF-beta superfamily in scallops was evolutionarily conserved. The spatiotemporal expression profiles suggested that different TGF-beta members have distinct functions. Several BMP-like and NODAL-like genes were highly expressed in early developmental stages, patterning the embryonic body plan. GDF8/11-like genes showed high expression in striated muscle and smooth muscle, suggesting that these genes may play a critical role in regulating muscle growth. Further analysis revealed a possible duplication of AMH, which played a key role in gonadal growth/maturation in scallops. In addition, this study found that several genes were involved in heat and hypoxia stress in scallops, providing new insights into the function of the TGF-beta superfamily.ConclusionCharacteristics of the TGF-beta superfamily in scallops were identified, including sequence structure, phylogenetic relationships, and selection pressure. The expression profiles of these genes in different tissues, at different developmental stages and under different stresses were investigated. Generally, the current study lays a foundation for further study of their pleiotropic biological functions in scallops.
Background The excavation and utilization of endophytic fungi from medicinal plants is highly important for the development of new drugs. The endophytic fungus Aspergillus tamarii TPD11, which was isolated and obtained by the authors in the previous stage, can produce a variety of polyphyllins with important potential applications in hemostasis, inflammation and antitumor activities; however, the genomic information of TPD11 is still unknown. Results In this study, we sequenced and assembled the whole genome of the endophytic fungus A. tamarii TPD11, resolved the genome evolutionary relationships of 24 Aspergillus strains, and phylogenetic analysis of the genomes of 16 strains revealed the evolutionary differences between Aspergillus and Penicillium and the mechanisms of genome expansion and contraction. CAZy annotation analysis revealed that TPD11 obtains nutrients mainly by ingesting starch from the host plant. TPD11 has a biosynthesis-related gene cluster for the synthesis of squalestatin S1, and the silencing of this biosynthesis-related gene cluster might increase the content of polyphyllin. Annotation of 11 UDP-glycosyltransferase genes helps to further reveal the biosynthetic pathway of polyphyllin. In addition, secondary metabolism gene cluster and CAZy analyses confirmed the potential probiotic, insecticidal and antimicrobial activities of TPD11 on host plants. Conclusions This study reveals the intrinsic mechanism by which endophytic fungi increase the content of polyphyllin, which provides a basis for the synthetic synthesis of the natural product polyphyllin.
Background DIR (Dirigent) proteins play important roles in the biosynthesis of lignin and lignans and are involved in various processes such as plant growth, development, and stress responses. However, there is less information about VvDIR proteins in grapevine (Vitis vinifera L). Results In this study, we used bioinformatics methods to identify members of the DIR gene family in grapevine and identified 18 VvDIR genes in grapevine. These genes were classified into 5 subfamilies based on phylogenetic analysis. In promoter analysis, various plant hormones, stress, and light-responsive cis-elements were detected. Expression profiling of all genes following Colletotrichum gloeosporioides infection and phytohormones (salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA)) application suggested significant upregulation of 17 and 6 VvDIR genes, respectively. Further, we overexpressed the VvDIR4 gene in Arabidopsis thaliana and grapes for functional analysis. Ectopic expression of VvDIR4 in A. thaliana and transient expression in grapes increased resistance against C. gloeosporioides and C. higginsianum, respectively. Phenotypic observations showed small disease lesions in transgenic plants. Further, the expression patterns of genes having presumed roles in SA and JA signaling pathways were also influenced. Lignin contents were measured before and after C. higginsianum infection; the transgenic A. thaliana lines showed higher lignin content than wild-type, and a significant increase was observed after C. higginsianum infection. Conclusions Based on the findings, we surmise that VvDIR4 is involved in hormonal and lignin synthesis pathways which regulate resistance against anthracnose. Our study provides novel insights into the function of VvDIR genes and new candidate genes for grapevine disease resistance breeding programs.
In this study, we conducted an assembly and analysis of the organelle genomes of Aconitum carmichaelii. Our investigation encompassed the examination of organelle genome structures, gene transfer events, and the environmental selection pressures affecting A. carmichaelii. The results revealed distinct evolutionary patterns in the organelle genomes of A. carmichaelii. Especially, the plastome exhibited a more conserved structure but a higher nucleotide substitution rate (NSR), while the mitogenome displayed a more complex structure with a slower NSR. Through homology analysis, we identified several instances of unidirectional protein-coding genes (PCGs) transferring from the plastome to the mitogenome. However, we did not observe any events which genes moved from the mitogenome to the plastome. Additionally, we observed multiple transposable element (TE) fragments in the organelle genomes, with both organelles showing different preferences for the type of nuclear TE insertion. Divergence time estimation suggested that rapid differentiation occurred in Aconitum species approximately 7.96 million years ago (Mya). This divergence might be associated with the reduction in CO2 levels and the significant uplift of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau (QTP) during the late Miocene. Selection pressure analysis indicated that the dN/dS values of both organelles were less than 1, suggested that organelle PCGs were subject to purification selection. However, we did not detect any positively selected genes (PSGs) in Subg. Aconitum and Subg. Lycoctonum. This observation further supports the idea that stronger negative selection pressure on organelle genes in Aconitum results in a more conserved amino acid sequence. In conclusion, this study contributes to a deeper understanding of organelle evolution in Aconitum species and provides a foundation for future research on the genetic mechanisms underlying the structure and function of the Aconitum plastome and mitogenome.
Background The Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) utilizes the Transposase Tn5 to probe open chromatic, which simultaneously reveals multiple transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) compared to traditional technologies. Deep learning (DL) technology, including convolutional neural networks (CNNs), has successfully found motifs from ATAC-seq data. Due to the limitation of the width of convolutional kernels, the existing models only find motifs with fixed lengths. A Graph neural network (GNN) can work on non-Euclidean data, which has the potential to find ATAC-seq motifs with different lengths. However, the existing GNN models ignored the relationships among ATAC-seq sequences, and their parameter settings should be improved.Results In this study, we proposed a novel GNN model named GNNMF to find ATAC-seq motifs via GNN and background coexisting probability. Our experiment has been conducted on 200 human datasets and 80 mouse datasets, demonstrated that GNNMF has improved the area of eight metrics radar scores of 4.92% and 6.81% respectively, and found more motifs than did the existing models.Conclusions In this study, we developed a novel model named GNNMF for finding multiple ATAC-seq motifs. GNNMF built a multi-view heterogeneous graph by using ATAC-seq sequences, and utilized background coexisting probability and the iterloss to find different lengths of ATAC-seq motifs and optimize the parameter sets. Compared to existing models, GNNMF achieved the best performance on TFBS prediction and ATAC-seq motif finding, which demonstrates that our improvement is available for ATAC-seq motif finding.
BackgroundSingle-cell transcriptome sequencing (scRNA-seq) has revolutionized the study of immune cells by overcoming the limitations of traditional antibody-based identification and isolation methods. This advancement allows us to obtain comprehensive gene expression profiles from a diverse array of vertebrate species, facilitating the identification of various cell types. Comparative immunology across vertebrates presents a promising approach to understanding the evolution of immune cell types. In this study, we conducted a comparative transcriptome analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) at the single-cell level across 12 species.ResultsOur findings shed light on the cellular compositional features of PBMCs, spanning from fish to mammals. Notably, we identified genes that exhibit vertebrate universality in characterizing immune cells. Moreover, our investigation revealed that monocytes have maintained a conserved transcriptional regulatory program throughout evolution, emphasizing their pivotal role in orchestrating immune cells to execute immune programs.ConclusionsThis comprehensive analysis provides valuable insights into the evolution of immune cells across vertebrates.
Background Cold hardiness is fundamental for amphibians to survive during the extremely cold winter on the Qinghai-Tibet plateau. Exploring the gene regulation mechanism of freezing-tolerant Rana kukunoris could help us to understand how the frogs survive in winter. Results Transcriptome of liver and muscle of R. kukunoris collected in hibernation and spring were assisted by single molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing technology. A total of 10,062 unigenes of R. kukunoris were obtained, and 9,924 coding sequences (CDS) were successfully annotated. Our examination of the mRNA response to whole body freezing and recover in the frogs revealed key genes concerning underlying antifreeze proteins and cryoprotectants (glucose and urea). Functional pathway analyses revealed differential regulated pathways of ribosome, energy supply, and protein metabolism which displayed a freeze-induced response and damage recover. Genes related to energy supply in the muscle of winter frogs were up-regulated compared with the muscle of spring frogs. The liver of hibernating frogs maintained modest levels of protein synthesis in the winter. In contrast, the liver underwent intensive high levels of protein synthesis and lipid catabolism to produce substantial quantity of fresh proteins and energy in spring. Differences between hibernation and spring were smaller than that between tissues, yet the physiological traits of hibernation were nevertheless passed down to active state in spring. Conclusions Based on our comparative transcriptomic analyses, we revealed the likely adaptive mechanisms of R. kukunoris. Ultimately, our study expands genetic resources for the freezing-tolerant frogs.
Background Single-cell clustering has played an important role in exploring the molecular mechanisms about cell differentiation and human diseases. Due to highly-stochastic transcriptomics data, accurate detection of cell types is still challenged, especially for RNA-sequencing data from human beings. In this case, deep neural networks have been increasingly employed to mine cell type specific patterns and have outperformed statistic approaches in cell clustering.Results Using cross-correlation to capture gene-gene interactions, this study proposes the scCompressSA method to integrate topological patterns from scRNA-seq data, with support of self-attention (SA) based coefficient compression (CC) block. This SA-based CC block is able to extract and employ static gene-gene interactions from scRNA-seq data. This proposed scCompressSA method has enhanced clustering accuracy in multiple benchmark scRNA-seq datasets by integrating topological and temporal features.Conclusion Static gene-gene interactions have been extracted as temporal features to boost clustering performance in single-cell clustering For the scCompressSA method, dual-channel SA based CC block is able to integrate topological features and has exhibited extraordinary detection accuracy compared with previous clustering approaches that only employ temporal patterns.
BackgroundThe intestinal mucosal immune system, renowned for its precise and sensitive regulation, can provide comprehensive and effective protection for the body, among which the ileum is a critical induction site for regulating mucosal immune homeostasis. Moniezia benedeni parasitizes the small intestine of sheep and can cause serious pathological damage or even death to the host when the infection is severe. In this study, 5 sheep infected with Moniezia benedeni were selected as the infected group, and 5 uninfected sheep were selected as the control group. The ileal transcriptome profile characteristics of Moniezia benedeni infection were analyzed based on RNA-seq sequencing technology, aiming to lay a foundation for further exploring the perception mechanism of sheep intestines to Moniezia benedeni infection and formulating effective prevention and control strategies. ResultsThe results showed that a total of 3,891 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were detected in the ileum tissues of sheep between the infected and control groups with 2,429 up-regulated genes and 1,462 down-regulated genes. GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of differential genes, as well as Clue GO analysis showed that differential genes were significantly enriched in immune and metabolic-related biological processes and signaling pathways. Particularly, in immune-related signaling pathways, the B cell receptor signaling pathway was significantly down-regulated, while in metabolic regulation related signaling pathways, Bile secretion, Fat digestion and absorption and Vitamin digestion and absorption were notably up-regulated. On this basis, the differential core genes related to immune metabolism were verified by qRT-PCR method. The results showed that OVAR, CD3E, CD8A, CD4 and CD28 were significantly up-regulated (P < 0.05), while CIITA, BLNK, BCL6 and CD79A were significantly down-regulated (P < 0.05), which were consistent with transcriptome sequencing data. ConclusionsThe results demonstrated that Moniezia benedeni infection significantly affected the immune and metabolic processes in sheep ileum, particularly, it significantly inhibited the activation process of host B cells, and also led to an overactive function of bile acid metabolism. This finding provides a solid foundation for further elucidating the response mechanism of Peyer's patches in sheep ileum to Moniezia tapeworm infection.
BackgroundThe Alpine Merino is a new breed of fine-wool sheep adapted to the cold and arid climate of the plateau in the world. It has been popularized in Northwest China due to its superior adaptability as well as excellent production performance. Those traits related to body weight, wool yield, and wool fiber characteristics, which are economically essential traits in Alpine Merino sheep, are controlled by QTL (Quantitative Trait Loci). Therefore, the identification of QTL and genetic markers for these key economic traits is a critical step in establishing a MAS (Marker-Assisted Selection) breeding program.ResultsIn this study, we constructed the high-density genetic linkage map of Alpine Merino sheep by sequencing 110 F1 generation individuals using WGR (Whole Genome Resequencing) technology. 14,942 SNPs (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism) were identified and genotyped. The map spanned 2,697.86 cM, with an average genetic marker interval of 1.44 cM. A total of 1,871 high-quality SNP markers were distributed across 27 linkage groups, with an average of 69 markers per LG (Linkage Group). Among them, the smallest genetic distance is 19.62 cM for LG2, while the largest is 237.19 cM for LG19. The average genetic distance between markers in LGs ranged from 0.24 cM (LG2) to 3.57 cM (LG17). The marker density in the LGs ranged from LG14 (39 markers) to LG1 (150 markers).ConclusionsThe first genetic map of Alpine Merino sheep we constructed included 14,942 SNPs, while 46 QTLs associated with body weight, wool yield and wool fiber traits were identified, laying the foundation for genetic studies and molecular marker-assisted breeding. Notably, there were QTL intervals for overlapping traits on LG4 and LG8, providing potential opportunities for multi-trait co-breeding and further theoretical support for selection and breeding of ultra-fine and meaty Alpine Merino sheep.
Background Gangba sheep as a famous breed of Tibetan sheep, its wool color is mainly white and black. Gangba wool is economically important as a high-quality raw material for Tibetan blankets and Tibetan serge. However, relatively few studies have been conducted on the wool color of Tibetan sheep.Results To fill this research gap, this study conducted an in-depth analysis of two populations of Gangba sheep (black and white wool color) using whole genome resequencing to identify genetic variation associated with wool color. Utilizing PCA, Genetic Admixture, and N-J Tree analyses, the present study revealed a consistent genetic relationship and structure between black and white wool colored Gangba sheep populations, which is consistent with their breed history. Analysis of selection signatures using multiple methods (FST, pi ratio, Tajima's D), 370 candidate genes were screened in the black wool group (GBB vs GBW); among them, MC1R, MLPH, SPIRE2, RAB17, SMARCA4, IRF4, CAV1, USP7, TP53, MYO6, MITF, MC2R, TET2, NF1, JAK1, GABRR1 genes are mainly associated with melanin synthesis, melanin delivery, and distribution. The enrichment results of the candidate genes identified 35 GO entries and 19 KEGG pathways associated with the formation of the black phenotype. 311 candidate genes were screened in the white wool group (GBW vs GBB); among them, REST, POU2F1, ADCY10, CCNB1, EP300, BRD4, GLI3, and SDHA genes were mainly associated with interfering with the differentiation of neural crest cells into melanocytes, affecting the proliferation of melanocytes, and inhibiting melanin synthesis. 31 GO entries and 22 KEGG pathways were associated with the formation of the white phenotype.Conclusions This study provides important information for understanding the genetic mechanism of wool color in Gangba, and provides genetic knowledge for improving and optimizing the wool color of Tibetan sheep. Genetic improvement and selective breeding to produce wool of specific colors can meet the demand for a diversity of wool products in the Tibetan wool textile market.
BackgroundDermatophagoides farinae proteins (DFPs) are abundantly expressed in D. farinae; however, their functions remain unknown. Our previous transcriptome sequencing analyses revealed that the basal expression of DFP1 and DFP2 in D. farinae was high and, more importantly, upregulated under temperature stress. Therefore, DFPs were speculated to exert a temperature stress response function. ResultsReal-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction detection revealed that both DFP1 and DFP2 were significantly upregulated under temperature stress. Particularly, DFP1 was upregulated under cold stress. Electrophoresis of D. farinae total proteins revealed an increased abundance of DFP1 and DFP2 (40-55 kDa bands) under temperature stress, which was corroborated by the mass spectrometry results. After silencing DFP1 and DFP2 further, temperature stress led to decreases in gene expression and survival rates. Moreover, DFP1 was identified as the upstream regulator of DFP2. ConclusionThis study highlights the temperature stress response functions of DFP1 and DFP2 at the mRNA and protein levels. These results provide important insights for applying DFP1 and DFP2 as potential target genes for the molecular prevention and control of D. farinae to prevent allergic diseases. The newly established methods provide methodological guidance for the study of genes with unknown functions in mites.
Background Several core breeding and supporting lines of the Qingyuan partridge chicken, a representative local chicken breed in China, have been developed over 20 years. Consequently, its economic traits related to growth and reproduction have been significantly improved by breeding selection and commercial utilization, but some characteristic traits, such as partridge feathers, high meat quality and sufficient flavor, have always been retained. However, effective methods for genetic assessment and functional gene exploration of similar trait groups are lacking. The presence of identical haplotype fragments transmitted from parent to offspring results in runs of homozygosity (ROH), which offer an efficient solution. In this study, genomes of 134 Qingyuan partridge chickens representing two breeding populations and one preserved population were re-sequenced to evaluate the genetic diversity and explore functional genes by analyzing the diversity, distribution, and frequency of ROH.Results The results showed a low level of genomic linkage and degree of inbreeding within both the bred and preserved populations, suggesting abundant genetic diversity and an adequate genetic potential of the Qingyuan partridge chicken. Throughout the long-term selection process, 21 genes, including GLI3, ANO5, BLVRA, EFNB2, SLC5A12, and SVIP, associated with breed-specific characteristics were accumulated within three ROH islands, whereas another 21 genes associated with growth traits including IRX1, IRX2, EGFR, TPK1, NOVA1, BDNF and so on were accumulated within five ROH islands.Conclusions These findings provide new insights into the genetic assessment and identification of genes with breed-specific and selective characteristics, offering a solid genetic basis for breeding and protection of Qingyuan partridge chickens.
Soybean represents a vital source of premium plant-based proteins for human nutrition. Importantly, the level of water-soluble protein (WSP) is crucial for determining the overall quality and nutritional value of such crops. Enhancing WSP levels in soybean plants is a high-priority goal in crop improvement. This study aimed to elucidate the genetic basis of WSP content in soybean seeds by identifying quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and set the foundation for subsequent gene cloning and functional analysis. Using 180 F10 recombinant inbred lines generated by crossing the high-protein soybean cultivar JiDou 12 with the wild variety Ye 9, our researcher team mapped the QTLs influencing protein levels, integrating Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis and gene expression profiling to identify candidate genes. During the 2020 and 2022 growing seasons, a standard bell-shaped distribution of protein content trait data was observed in these soybean lines. Eight QTLs affecting protein content were found across eight chromosomes, with LOD scores ranging from 2.59 to 7.30, explaining 4.15-11.74% of the phenotypic variance. Notably, two QTLs were newly discovered, one with a elite allele at qWSPC-15 from Ye 9. The major QTL, qWSPC-19, on chromosome 19 was stable across conditions and contained genes involved in nitrogen metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, and signaling. Two genes from this QTL, Glyma.19G185700 and Glyma.19G186000, exhibited distinct expression patterns at maturity, highlighting the influence of these genes on protein content. This research revealed eight QTLs for WSP content in soybean seeds and proposed a gene for the key QTL qWSPC-19, laying groundwork for gene isolation and enhanced soybean breeding through the use of molecular markers. These insights are instrumental for developing protein-rich soybean cultivars.
BackgroundLow levels of the essential amino acid lysine in maize endosperm is considered to be a major problem regarding the nutritional quality of food and feed. Increasing the lysine content of maize is important to improve the quality of food and feed nutrition. Although the genetic basis of quality protein maize (QPM) has been studied, the further exploration of the quantitative trait loci (QTL) underlying lysine content variation still needs more attention.ResultsEight maize inbred lines with increased lysine content were used to construct four double haploid (DH) populations for identification of QTLs related to lysine content. The lysine content in the four DH populations exhibited continuous and normal distribution. A total of 12 QTLs were identified in a range of 4.42-12.66% in term of individual phenotypic variation explained (PVE) which suggested the quantitative control of lysine content in maize. Five main genes involved in maize lysine biosynthesis pathways in the QTL regions were identified in this study.ConclusionsThe information presented will allow the exploration of candidate genes regulating lysine biosynthesis pathways and be useful for marker-assisted selection and gene pyramiding in high-lysine maize breeding programs.
Temporal transcriptional variation is a major contributor to functional evolution and the developmental process. Parthenogenetic water fleas of the genus Daphnia (Cladocera) provide an ideal model to characterize gene expression patterns across distinct developmental stages. Herein, we report RNA-seq data for female Daphnia mitsukuri at three developmental stages: the embryo, juvenile (three timepoints) and adult. Comparisons of gene expression patterns among these three developmental stages and weighted gene co-expression network analysis based on expression data across developmental stages identified sets of genes underpinning each of the developmental stages of D. mitsukuri. Specifically, highly expressed genes (HEGs) at the embryonic developmental stage were associated with cell proliferation, ensuring the necessary foundation for subsequent development; HEGs at the juvenile stages were associated with chemosensory perception, visual perception and neurotransmission, allowing individuals to enhance detection of potential environmental risks; HEGs at the adult stage were associated with antioxidative defensive systems, enabling adults to mount an efficient response to perceived environmental risks. Additionally, we found a significant overlap between expanded gene families of Daphnia species and HEGs at the juvenile stages, and these genes were associated with visual perception and neurotransmission. Our work provides a resource of developmental transcriptomes, and comparative analyses that characterize gene expression dynamics throughout development of Daphnia.
Background Stigma exsertion is an essential agricultural trait that can promote cross-pollination to improve hybrid seed production efficiency. However, the molecular mechanism controlling stigma exsertion remains unknown. Results In this study, the Nicotiana tabacum cv. K326 and its two homonuclear-heteroplasmic lines, MSK326 (male-sterile) and MSK326SE (male-sterile and stigma exserted), were used to investigate the mechanism of tobacco stigma exsertion. A comparison of the flowers between the three lines showed that the stigma exsertion of MSK326SE was mainly due to corolla shortening. Therefore, the corollas of the three lines were sampled and presented for RNA-seq analysis, which found 338 candidate genes that may cause corolla shortening. These genes were equally expressed in K326 and MSK326, but differentially expressed in MSK326SE. Among these 338 genes, 15 were involved in hormone synthesis or signal transduction pathways. Consistently, the content of auxin, dihydrozeatin, gibberellin, and jasmonic acid was significantly decreased in the MSK326SE corolla, whereas abscisic acid levels were significantly increased. Additionally, seven genes involved in cell division, cell cycle, or cell expansion were identified. Protein-protein interaction network analysis identified 45 nodes and 79 protein interactions, and the largest module contained 20 nodes and 52 protein interactions, mainly involved in the hormone signal transduction and pathogen defensive pathways. Furthermore, a putative hub gene coding a serine/threonine-protein kinase was identified for the network. Conclusions Our results suggest that hormones may play a key role in regulating tobacco stigma exsertion induced by corolla shortening.
BackgroundAs the inflorescence of wheat, spike architecture largely determines grain productivity. Dissecting the genetic basis for the spike morphology of wheat can contribute to the designation of ideal spike morphology to improve grain production.ResultsThe present study characterizes a dense spike1 (ds1) mutant, derived from Nongda3753, induced by EMS treatment, which exhibits a dense spike and reduced plant height. Through bulked segregant analysis sequencing (BSA-Seq) of two segregating populations, ds1 was mapped to the short arm of chromosome 7B. Further genotypic and phenotypic analyses of the residual heterozygous lines from F3 to F6 of Yong3002xds1 revealed that there was a 0-135 Mb deletion in chromosome 7B associated with the dense spike phenotype. The reads count analysis of the two bulks in BSA-Seq, along with the cytological analysis of ds1, ND3753, NIL-ds1 and NIL-Y3002, confirmed that the partial unidirectional translocation of 5AL (543-713 Mb) to 7BS (0-135 Mb) exists in ds1. This translocation led to an increase in both copy number and expression of the Q gene, which is one of the reasons for the dense spike phenotype observed in ds1.ConclusionPartial unidirectional translocation from 5AL to 7BS was identified in the EMS-induced mutant ds1, which exhibits dense spike phenotype. This research illustrates the effect of one chromosome structure variation on wheat spike morphology, and provides new materials with several chromosome structure variations for future wheat breeding.
Background Culex tritaeniorhynchus is widely distributed in China, from Hainan Island in the south to Heilongjiang in the north, covering tropical, subtropical, and temperate climate zones. Culex tritaeniorhynchus carries 19 types of arboviruses. It is the main vector of the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), posing a serious threat to human health. Understanding the effects of environmental factors on Culex tritaeniorhynchus can provide important insights into its population structure or isolation patterns, which is currently unclear. Results In total, 138 COI haplotypes were detected in the 552 amplified sequences, and the haplotype diversity (Hd) value increased from temperate (0.534) to tropical (0.979) regions. The haplotype phylogeny analysis revealed that the haplotypes were divided into two high-support evolutionary branches. Temperate populations were predominantly distributed in evolutionary branch II, showing some genetic isolation from tropical/subtropical populations and less gene flow between groups. The neutral test results of HNQH (Qionghai) and HNHK(Haikou) populations were negative (P < 0.05), indicating many low-frequency mutations in the populations and that the populations might be in the process of expansion. Moreover, Wolbachia infection was detected only in SDJN (Jining) (2.24%), and all Wolbachia genotypes belonged to supergroup B. To understand the influence of environmental factors on mosquito-borne viruses, we examined the prevalence of Culex tritaeniorhynchus infection in three ecological environments in Shandong Province. We discovered that the incidence of JEV infection was notably greater in Culex tritaeniorhynchus from lotus ponds compared to those from irrigation canal regions. In this study, the overall JEV infection rate was 15.27 per 1000, suggesting the current risk of Japanese encephalitis outbreaks in Shandong Province. Conclusions Tropical and subtropical populations of Culex tritaeniorhynchus showed higher genetic diversity and those climatic conditions provide great advantages for the establishment and expansion of Culex tritaeniorhynchus. There are differences in JEV infection rates in wild populations of Culex tritaeniorhynchus under different ecological conditions. Our results suggest a complex interplay of genetic differentiation, population structure, and environmental factors in shaping the dynamics of Culex tritaeniorhynchus. The low prevalence of Wolbachia in wild populations may reflect the recent presence of Wolbachia invasion in Culex tritaeniorhynchus.
BackgroundBivalves represent a vital economic resource in aquaculture for their high productivity and extensive market demand. Growth is one of the most important and desired aquaculture traits for bivalves, regulated by multiple levels, notably intricate metabolic processes. However, the understanding of the metabolic profiles that influence bivalve growth is limited, particularly from a multi-tissue perspective.ResultsIn this study, metabolic profiles of multiple tissues of Chlamys farreri with different growth performance were systematically investigated by ultraperformance liquid chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-Q-TOF-MS). Through comparing the metabolic variation between fast-growing (FG) scallops and slow-growing (SG) scallops, 613, 509, 105, and 192 significantly different metabolites (SDMs) were identified in the mantle, gill, adductor muscle, and digestive gland, respectively. Growth-related metabolic pathways including sphingolipid metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis, and ABC transporter pathway, along with 11 SDMs associated with growth traits were identified in all four tissues, implying they were involved in the growth of multiple tissues in scallops. Tissue-specific metabolic profiling indicated that sulfur-containing amino acid metabolism in the mantle potentially contributed to shell growth, while the gill synergistically participated with the mantle through various metabolic processes, such as tyrosine metabolism, glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism and melanogenesis; energy metabolism was crucial for adductor muscle growth; and nutrients digestion and absorption in the digestive gland were linked to scallop growth.ConclusionsOur results represent the first comprehensive analysis of the crucial pathways and metabolites associated with the growth of C. farreri, offering valuable insights for future bivalve aquaculture production.
Background Coral reefs experience frequent and severe disturbances that can overwhelm their natural resilience. In such cases, ecological restoration is essential for coral reef recovery. Sexual reproduction has been reported to present the simplest and most cost-effective means for coral reef restoration. However, larval settlement and post-settlement survival represent bottlenecks for coral recruitment in sexual reproduction. While bacteria play a significant role in triggering coral metamorphosis and settlement in many coral species, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown. In this study, we employed a transcriptome-level analysis to elucidate the intricate interactions between bacteria and coral larvae that are crucial for the settlement process. Results High Metabacillus indicus strain cB07 inoculation densities resulted in the successful induction of metamorphosis and settlement of coral Pocillopora damicoris larvae. Compared with controls, inoculated coral larvae exhibited a pronounced increase in the abundance of strain cB07 during metamorphosis and settlement, followed by a significant decrease in total lipid contents during the settled stage. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) during metamorphosis were significantly enriched in amino acid, protein, fatty acid, and glucose related metabolic pathways. In settled coral larvae induced by strain cB07, there was a significant enrichment of DEGs with essential roles in the establishment of a symbiotic relationship between coral larvae and their symbiotic partners. The photosynthetic efficiency of strain cB07 induced primary polyp holobionts was improved compared to those of the negative controls. In addition, coral primary polyps induced by strain cB07 showed significant improvements in energy storage and survival. Conclusions Our findings revealed that strain cB07 can promote coral larval settlement and enhance post-settlement survival and fitness. Manipulating coral sexual reproduction with strain cB07 can overcome the current recruitment bottleneck. This innovative approach holds promise for future coral reef restoration efforts.
Background Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are part of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) superfamily and play crucial roles in bone development, as well as in the formation and maintenance of various organs. Triplophysa dalaica, a small loach fish that primarily inhabits relatively high elevations and cooler water bodies, was the focus of this study. Understanding the function of BMP genes during the morphogenesis of T. dalaica helps to clarify the mechanisms of its evolution and serves as a reference for the study of BMP genes in other bony fishes. The data for the T. dalaica transcriptome and genome used in this investigation were derived from the outcomes of our laboratory sequencing. Results This study identified a total of 26 BMP genes, all of which, except for BMP1, possess similar TGF-beta structural domains. We conducted an analysis of these 26 BMP genes, examining their physicochemical properties, subcellular localization, phylogenetic relationships, covariance within and among species, chromosomal localization, gene structure, conserved motifs, conserved structural domains, and expression patterns. Our findings indicated that three BMP genes were associated with unstable proteins, while 11 BMP genes were located within the extracellular matrix. Furthermore, some BMP genes were duplicated, with the majority being enriched in the GO:0008083 pathway, which is related to growth factor activity. It was hypothesized that genes within the BMP1/3/11/15 subgroup (Group I) play a significant role in the growth and development of T. dalaica. By analyzing the expression patterns of proteins in nine tissues (gonad, kidney, gill, spleen, brain, liver, fin, heart, and muscle), we found that BMP genes play diverse regulatory roles during different stages of growth and development and exhibit characteristics of division of labor. Conclusions This study contributes to a deeper understanding of BMP gene family member expression patterns in high-altitude, high-salinity environments and provides valuable insights for future research on the BMP gene family in bony fishes.
BackgroundBackfat serves as a vital fat reservoir in pigs, and its excessive accumulation will adversely impact pig growth performance, farming efficiency, and pork quality. The aim of this research is to integrate assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with high-throughput sequencing (ATAC-seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to explore the molecular mechanisms underlying porcine backfat deposition.ResultsATAC-seq analysis identified 568 genes originating from 698 regions exhibiting differential accessibility, which were significantly enriched in pathways pertinent to adipocyte differentiation and lipid metabolism. Besides, a total of 283 transcription factors (TFs) were identified by motif analysis. RNA-seq analysis revealed 978 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), which were enriched in pathways related to energy metabolism, cell cycle and signal transduction. The integration of ATAC-seq and RNA-seq data indicates that DEG expression levels are associated with chromatin accessibility. This comprehensive study highlights the involvement of critical pathways, including the Wnt signaling pathway, Jak-STAT signaling pathway, and fatty acid degradation, in the regulation of backfat deposition. Through rigorous analysis, we identified several candidate genes (LEP, CTBP2, EHHADH, OSMR, TCF7L2, BCL2, FGF1, UCP2, CCND1, TIMP1, and VDR) as potentially significant contributors to backfat deposition. Additionally, we constructed TF-TF and TF-target gene regulatory networks and identified a series of potential TFs related to backfat deposition (FOS, STAT3, SMAD3, and ESR1).ConclusionsThis study represents the first application of ATAC-seq and RNA-seq, affording a novel perspective into the mechanisms underlying backfat deposition and providing invaluable resources for the enhancement of pig breeding programs.
BackgroundAlternative splicing (AS) is a principal mode of genetic regulation and one of the most widely used mechanisms to generate structurally and functionally distinct mRNA and protein variants. Dysregulation of AS may result in aberrant transcription and protein products, leading to the emergence of human diseases. Although considered important for regulating gene expression, genome-wide AS dysregulation, underlying mechanisms, and clinical relevance in knee osteoarthritis (OA) remain unelucidated. Therefore, in this study, we elucidated and validated AS events and their regulatory mechanisms during OA progression.ResultsIn this study, we identified differentially expressed genes between human OA and healthy meniscus samples. Among them, the OA-associated genes were primarily enriched in biological pathways such as extracellular matrix organization and ossification. The predominant OA-associated regulated AS (RAS) events were found to be involved in apoptosis during OA development. The expression of the apoptosis-related gene BCL2L13, XAF1, and NF2 were significantly different between OA and healthy meniscus samples. The construction of a covariation network of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and RAS genes revealed that differentially expressed RBP genes LAMA2 and CUL4B may regulate the apoptotic genes XAF1 and BCL2L13 to undergo AS events during OA progression. Finally, RT-qPCR revealed that CUL4B expression was significantly higher in OA meniscus samples than in normal controls and that the AS ratio of XAF1 was significantly different between control and OA samples; these findings were consistent with their expected expression and regulatory relationships.ConclusionsDifferentially expressed RBPs may regulate the AS of apoptotic genes during knee OA progression. XAF1 and its regulator, CUL4B, may serve as novel biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets for this disease.
BackgroundAnimal venom systems are considered as valuable model for investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying phenotypic evolution. Stonefish are the most venomous and dangerous fish because of severe human envenomation and occasionally fatalities, whereas the genomic background of their venom has not been fully explored compared with that in other venomous animals.ResultsIn this study, we followed modern venomic pipelines to decode the Synanceia verrucosa venom components. A catalog of 478 toxin genes was annotated based on our assembled chromosome-level genome. Integrative analysis of the high-quality genome, the transcriptome of the venom gland, and the proteome of crude venom revealed mechanisms underlying the venom complexity in S. verrucosa. Six tandem-duplicated neoVTX subunit genes were identified as the major source for the neoVTX protein production. Further isoform sequencing revealed massive alternative splicing events with a total of 411 isoforms demonstrated by the six genes, which further contributed to the venom diversity. We then characterized 12 dominantly expressed toxin genes in the venom gland, and 11 of which were evidenced to produce the venom protein components, with the neoVTX proteins as the most abundant. Other major venom proteins included a presumed CRVP, Kuntiz-type serine protease inhibitor, calglandulin protein, and hyaluronidase. Besides, a few of highly abundant non-toxin proteins were also characterized and they were hypothesized to function in housekeeping or hemostasis maintaining roles in the venom gland. Notably, gastrotropin like non-toxin proteins were the second highest abundant proteins in the venom, which have not been reported in other venomous animals and contribute to the unique venom properties of S. verrucosa.ConclusionsThe results identified the major venom composition of S. verrucosa, and highlighted the contribution of neoVTX genes to the diversity of venom composition through tandem-duplication and alternative splicing. The diverse neoVTX proteins in the venom as lethal particles are important for understanding the adaptive evolution of S. verrucosa. Further functional studies are encouraged to exploit the venom components of S. verrucosa for pharmaceutical innovation.
Background While rabbits are used as models in skin irritation tests, the presence of irregular patches and thickening on the dorsal skin can affect precise evaluation. In this study, genes associated with patchiness or non-patchiness on the dorsal skin of New Zealand rabbits were investigated to identify potential regulators of the patchiness phenotype. Results The results showed that parameters associated with hair follicles (HFs), such as HF density, skin thickness, and HF depth, were augmented in rabbits with the patchiness phenotype relative to the non-patchiness phenotype. A total of 592 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between the two groups using RNA-sequencing. These included KRT72, KRT82, KRT85, FUT8, SOX9, and WNT5B. The functions of the DEGs were investigated by GO and KEGG enrichment analyses. A candidate gene, KRT82, was selected for further molecular function verification. There was a significant positive correlation between KRT82 expression and HF-related parameters, and KRT82 overexpression and knockdown experiments with rabbit dermal papilla cells (DPCs) showed that it regulated genes related to skin and HF growth and development. Investigation of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the exons and promoter region of KRT82 identified four SNPs in the promoter region but none in the exons. The G.-631G > T, T.-696T > C, G.-770G > T and A.-873 A > C alleles conformed to the Hardy - Weinberg equilibrium, and three identified haplotypes showed linkage disequilibrium. Luciferase reporter assays showed that the core promoter region of KRT82 was located in the - 600 to - 1200 segment, in which the four SNPs were located. Conclusions The morphological characteristics of the patchiness phenotype were analyzed in New Zealand rabbits and DEGs associated with this phenotype were identified by RNA-sequencing. The biological functions of the gene KRT82 associated with this phenotype were analyzed, and four SNPs were identified in the promoter region of the gene. These findings suggest that KRT82 may be a potential biomarker for the breeding of experimental New Zealand rabbits.
Background DNA N6-methyladenosine (6mA), as an important epigenetic modification, widely exists in bacterial genomes and participates in the regulation of toxicity, antibiotic resistance, and antioxidant. With the continuous development of sequencing technology, more 6mA sites have been identified in bacterial genomes, but few studies have focused on the distribution characteristics of 6mA at the whole-genome level and its association with gene expression and function. Results This study conducted an in-depth analysis of the 6mA in the genomes of two pathogenic bacteria, Aeromonas veronii and Helicobacter pylori. The results showed that the 6mA was widely distributed in both strains. In A. veronii, 6mA sites were enriched at 3' end of protein-coding genes, exhibiting a certain inhibitory effect on gene expression. Genes with low 6mA density were associated with cell motility. While in H. pylori, 6mA sites were enriched at 5' end of protein-coding genes, potentially enhancing gene expression. Genes with low 6mA density were closely related to defense mechanism. Conclusions This study elucidated the distribution characteristics of 6mA in A. veronii and H. pylori, highlighting the effects of 6mA on gene expression and function. These findings provide valuable insights into the epigenetic regulation and functional characteristics of A. veronii and H. pylori.
To gain a deeper understanding of the metabolic differences within and outside the body, as well as changes in transcription levels following estrus in yaks, we conducted transcriptome and metabolome analyses on female yaks in both estrus and non-estrus states. The metabolome analysis identified 114, 13, and 91 distinct metabolites in urine, blood, and follicular fluid, respectively. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis highlighted an enrichment of pathways related to amino acid and lipid metabolism across all three body fluids. Our transcriptome analysis revealed 122 differentially expressed genes within microRNA (miRNA) and 640 within long non-coding RNA (lncRNA). Functional enrichment analysis of lncRNA and miRNA indicated their involvement in cell signaling, disease resistance, and immunity pathways. We constructed a regulatory network composed of 10 lncRNAs, 4 miRNAs, and 30 mRNAs, based on the targeted regulation relationships of the differentially expressed genes. In conclusion, the accumulation of metabolites such as amino acids, steroids, and organic acids, along with the expression changes of key genes like miR-129 during yak estrus, provide initial insights into the estrus mechanism in yaks.
BackgroundCRISPR-Cas9 technology has advanced in vivo gene therapy for disorders like hemophilia A, notably through the successful targeted incorporation of the F8 gene into the Alb locus in hepatocytes, effectively curing this disorder in mice. However, thoroughly evaluating the safety and specificity of this therapy is essential. Our study introduces a novel methodology to analyze complex insertion sequences at the on-target edited locus, utilizing barcoded long-range PCR, CRISPR RNP-mediated deletion of unedited alleles, magnetic bead-based long amplicon enrichment, and nanopore sequencing.ResultsWe identified the expected F8 insertions and various fragment combinations resulting from the in vivo linearization of the double-cut plasmid donor. Notably, our research is the first to document insertions exceeding ten kbp. We also found that a small proportion of these insertions were derived from sources other than donor plasmids, including Cas9-sgRNA plasmids, genomic DNA fragments, and LINE-1 elements.ConclusionsOur study presents a robust method for analyzing the complexity of on-target editing, particularly for in vivo long insertions, where donor template integration can be challenging. This work offers a new tool for quality control in gene editing outcomes and underscores the importance of detailed characterization of edited genomic sequences. Our findings have significant implications for enhancing the safety and effectiveness of CRISPR-Cas9 gene therapy in treating various disorders, including hemophilia A.
Background Diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM) is becoming a very well-known clinical entity and leads to increased heart failure in diabetic patients. Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) play an important role in the pathogenesis of DCM. In the present study, the expression profiles of lncRNAs and mRNAs were illuminated in myocardium from DCM mice, with purpose of exploring probable pathological processes of DCM involved by differentially expressed genes in order to provide a new direction for the future researches of DCM.Results The results showed that a total of 93 differentially expressed lncRNA transcripts and 881 mRNA transcripts were aberrantly expressed in db/db mice compared with the controls. The top 6 differentially expressed lncRNAs like up-regulated Hmga1b, Gm8909, Gm50252 and down-regulated Msantd4, 4933413J09Rik, Gm41414 have not yet been reported in DCM. The lncRNAs-mRNAs co-expression network analysis showed that LncRNA 2610507I01Rik, 2310015A16Rik, Gm10503, A930015D03Rik and Gm48483 were the most relevant to differentially expressed mRNAs.Conclusion Our results showed that db/db DCM mice exist differentially expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs in hearts. These differentially expressed lncRNAs may be involved in the pathological process of cardiomyocyte apoptosis and fibrosis in DCM.
With increasing age, the reproductive performance of women and female animals declines. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying ovarian aging and age-related fertility decline remain unclear. Granulosa cells (GCs) are suspected to play an important role in reproductive aging, and their proliferation, apoptosis, and steroid hormone secretion are used to determine the fate of follicles and ovarian function. First, we found that the proliferative ability of GCs from the old mouse group (10-month-old) decreased compared with that from the young mouse group (6-week-old), and cell cycle arrest occurred in old mice. To investigate changes in protein modification, we compared the levels of protein acetylation in GCs from young and old mice. We found that the K1118, K1120, K1122, and K1124 sites of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) were increasingly acetylated with age, resulting in a decrease in DNMT1 protein expression. Therefore, we performed whole-genome methylation sequencing of GCs in the two groups and found that the CG methylation levels in the old group were lower than those in the young group. Furthermore, the inhibition of DNMT1 expression in GCs resulted in cell cycle arrest. This study revealed the dynamics and importance of protein acetylation and DNA methylation in GCs during reproductive aging. The findings provide a theoretical basis for studying the mechanism of reproductive aging in mammals.
BackgroundThe genus Sapovirus in the family Caliciviridae comprises of a genetically diverse group of viruses that are responsible for causing acute gastroenteritis in both human and animals globally. As the number of sequences continues to grow and more recombinant sequences are identified, the classification criteria of genogroups and genotypes of sapovirus need to be further refined. In this study, we aimed to optimize the classification of sapoviruses. ResultsThrough evolutionary clustering and genetic distance analysis, we have updated the classification criteria for VP1 genogroup and genotypes. We adjusted the original mean values +/- 3 standard deviations (SD) of genetic distances to mean values +/- 2.5SD, resulting the corresponding cutoff values for the same genotype and genogroup set at <0.161 and <0.503, respectively. Additionally, we established classification criteria for RdRp types and groups, referred to as P-types and P-groups,, with mean values +/- 2SD and cutoff values of <0.266 and <0.531 for the same type and group, respectively. This refinement has expanded the VP1 genogroups to thirty-four and identified twenty-four P-groups. For human sapoviruses, the new criteria have resulted in the addition of one genotype, GV.PNA1. Moreover, the new criteria defined three P-groups and 21 P-types for human sapoviruses. Spatial-temporal analysis revealed no specific distribution pattern for human sapoviruses. ConclusionsWe established a dual typing system on classification based on VP1 and RdRp nucleotide sequences for sapoviruses.
Background The R2R3-MYB transcription factors in plants participate in various physiological and biochemical processes and responds to various external stimuli. Prunus sibirica (known as Siberian apricot) is a drupe tree species that produces extremely high nutritional value kernels. However, it is susceptiblility to frost damage during the flowering period, results in a marked reduction in kernel yield. Results In this study, the MYB gene family of P. sibirica (PsMYB) was systematically analyzed, and 116 R2R3-MYB genes that were distributed unevenly over eight chromosomes were ultimately screened. Phylogenetic analysis divided these 116 genes into 30 subgroups. We discovered that 37 PsMYBs had cold stress-responsive promoters, and six PsMYBs were annotated to be associated with cold response. Intraspecific homology analysis identified segmental duplication as the primary gene amplification mechanism, and homology analysis of the PsMYB genes with those of five other species revealed phylogenetic relationships with Rosaceae species. Protein interaction studies revealed collaborative regulation of the PsMYB proteins with Arabidopsis protein, and transcriptome analysis identified PsMYB genes that were highly expressed at low temperatures. Additionally, the expression levels of 22 PsMYBs in different tissue parts of P. sibirica and under different low-temperature stress conditions were evaluated using quantitative real-time PCR, with the results verifying that PsMYBs are specifically expressed in different plant parts and may be involved in the growth and development of P. sibirica species. Genes upregulated after exposure to low-temperature stress and likely involved in cold response were identified. Conclusion This study lays a foundation for understanding the molecular biology of PsMYBs in P. sibirica and provides a theoretical basis for the future study of transgenic lines with cold resistance during the flowering period of this tree.
Background Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa Willd.) is valued for its nutritional richness. However, pre-harvest sprouting poses a significant threat to yield and grain quality. This study aims to enhance our understanding of pre-harvest sprouting mitigation strategies, specifically through delayed sowing and avoiding rainy seasons during quinoa maturation. The overarching goal is to identify cold-resistant varieties and unravel the molecular mechanisms behind the low-temperature response of quinoa. We employed bioinformatics and genomics tools for a comprehensive genome-wide analysis of polyamines (PAs) and ethylene synthesis gene families in quinoa under low-temperature stress. Results This involved the identification of 37 PA biosynthesis and 30 PA catabolism genes, alongside 227 ethylene synthesis. Structural and phylogenetic analyses showcased conserved patterns, and subcellular localization predictions indicated diverse cellular distributions. The results indicate that the PA metabolism of quinoa is closely linked to ethylene synthesis, with multiple genes showing an upregulation in response to cold stress. However, differential expression within gene families suggests a nuanced regulatory network. Conclusions Overall, this study contributes valuable insights for the functional characterization of the PA metabolism and ethylene synthesis of quinoa, which emphasize their roles in plant low-temperature tolerance and providing a foundation for future research in this domain.
Edible fungi cultivation serves as an efficient biological approach to transforming agroforestry byproducts, particularly Korshinsk peashrub (KP) branches into valuable mushroom (Lentinus edodes) products. Despite the widespread use of KP, the molecular mechanisms underlying its regulation of mushroom development remain largely unknown. In this study, we conducted a combined analysis of transcriptome and metabolism of mushroom fruiting bodies cultivated on KP substrates compared to those on apple wood sawdust (AWS) substrate. Our aim was to identify key metabolic pathways and genes that respond to the effects of KP substrates on mushrooms. The results revealed that KP induced at least a 1.5-fold increase in protein and fat content relative to AWS, with 15% increase in polysaccharide and total sugar content in mushroom fruiting bodies. There are 1196 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between mushrooms treated with KP relative to AWS. Bioinformatic analysis show significant enrichments in amino acid metabolic process, oxidase activity, malic enzyme activity and carbon metabolism among the 698 up-regulated DEGs induced by KP against AWS. Additionally, pathways associated with organic acid transport and methane metabolism were significantly enriched among the 498 down-regulated DEGs. Metabolomic analysis identified 439 differentially abundant metabolites (DAMs) in mushrooms treated with KP compared to AWS. Consistent with the transcriptome data, KEGG analysis on metabolomic dataset suggested significant enrichments in carbon metabolism, alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism among the up-regulated DAMs by KP. In particular, some DAMs were enhanced by 1.5-fold, including D-glutamine, L-glutamate, glucose and pyruvate in mushroom samples treated with KP relative to AWS. Targeted metabolomic analysis confirmed the contents of DAMs related to glutamate metabolism and energy metabolism. In conclusion, our findings suggest that reprogrammed carbon metabolism and oxidoreductase pathways act critical roles in the enhanced response of mushroom to KP substrates.
This study aimed to investigate the temporal accumulation of odor fatty acids (OFAs) in the dorsal subcutaneous adipose tissue, and uncover their dynamic regulatory metabolic pathways from the transcriptomic perspective in lambs from birth to market. Thirty-two Hulun Buir lambs were selected and randomly assigned to four different sampling stages following their growth trajectories: neonatal (day 1), weaning (day 75), mid-fattening (day 150), and late-fattening (day 180) stages. Results indicated that the contents of three OFAs increased progressively as lambs matured, with the most drastic change occurred at mid-fattening vs. weaning. The dynamic transcriptomic profiles exhibited two distinct phases, with differentially expressed genes (DEGs) before weaning were involved in immune homeostasis, whereas those after weaning were associated with nutrient metabolism. Furthermore, DEGs involved in lipid metabolism and branch-chain amino acid degradation pathways exhibited surge in expression at mid-fattening vs. weaning, with acetyl-CoA and branched-chain-CoA as intermediates, and driven by regulation of PPAR and AMPK signaling pathways. Overall, our findings provided novel insight into the critical time window and pivotal candidate genes of OFA synthesis in the adipose tissue, which will assist with the targeted development of nutritional strategies to inhibit OFA accumulation of lambs.
BackgroundThere has been a significant surge in the global prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM), which increases the susceptibility of individuals to ovarian cancer (OC). However, the relationship between DM and OC remains largely unexplored. The objective of this study is to provide preliminary insights into the shared molecular regulatory mechanisms and potential biomarkers between DM and OC.MethodsMultiple datasets from the GEO database were utilized for bioinformatics analysis. Single cell datasets from the GEO database were analysed. Subsequently, immune cell infiltration analysis was performed on mRNA expression data. The intersection of these datasets yielded a set of common genes associated with both OC and DM. Using these overlapping genes and Cytoscape, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed, and 10 core targets were selected. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses were then conducted on these core targets. Additionally, advanced bioinformatics analyses were conducted to construct a TF-mRNA-miRNA coregulatory network based on identified core targets. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry staining (IHC) and real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) were employed for the validation of the expression and biological functions of core proteins, including HSPAA1, HSPA8, SOD1, and transcription factors SREBF2 and GTAT2, in ovarian tumors.ResultsThe immune cell infiltration analysis based on mRNA expression data for both DM and OC, as well as analysis using single-cell datasets, reveals significant differences in mononuclear cell levels. By intersecting the single-cell datasets, a total of 119 targets related to mononuclear cells in both OC and DM were identified. PPI network analysis further identified 10 hub genesincludingHSP90AA1, HSPA8, SNRPD2, UBA52, SOD1, RPL13A, RPSA, ITGAM, PPP1CC, and PSMA5, as potential targets of OC and DM. Enrichment analysis indicated that these genes are primarily associated with neutrophil degranulation, GDP-dissociation inhibitor activity, and the IL-17 signaling pathway, suggesting their involvement in the regulation of the tumor microenvironment. Furthermore, the TF-gene and miRNA-gene regulatory networks were validated using NetworkAnalyst. The identified TFs included SREBF2, GATA2, and SRF, while the miRNAs included miR-320a, miR-378a-3p, and miR-26a-5p. Simultaneously, IHC and RT-qPCR reveal differential expression of core targets in ovarian tumors after the onset of diabetes. RT-qPCR further revealed that SREBF2 and GATA2 may influence the expression of core proteins, including HSP90AA1, HSPA8, and SOD1.ConclusionThis study revealed the shared gene interaction network between OC and DM and predicted the TFs and miRNAs associated with core genes in monocytes. Our research findings contribute to identifying potential biological mechanisms underlying the relationship between OC and DM.
Background Soybean mosaic disease caused by soybean mosaic virus (SMV) is one of the most devastating and widespread diseases in soybean producing areas worldwide. The WRKY transcription factors (TFs) are widely involved in plant development and stress responses. However, the roles of the GmWRKY TFs in resistance to SMV are largely unclear. Results Here, 185 GmWRKYs were characterized in soybean (Glycine max), among which 60 GmWRKY genes were differentially expressed during SMV infection according to the transcriptome data. The transcriptome data and RT-qPCR results showed that the expression of GmWRKY164 decreased after imidazole treatment and had higher expression levels in the incompatible combination between soybean cultivar variety Jidou 7 and SMV strain N3. Remarkably, the silencing of GmWRKY164 reduced callose deposition and enhanced virus spread during SMV infection. In addition, the transcript levels of the GmGSL7c were dramatically lower upon the silencing of GmWRKY164. Furthermore, EMSA and ChIP-qPCR revealed that GmWRKY164 can directly bind to the promoter of GmGSL7c, which contains the W-box element. Conclusion Our findings suggest that GmWRKY164 plays a positive role in resistance to SMV infection by regulating the expression of GmGSL7c, resulting in the deposition of callose and the inhibition of viral movement, which provides guidance for future studies in understanding virus-resistance mechanisms in soybean.
Background Adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) RNA editing is a co-/post-transcriptional modification introducing A-to-G variations in RNAs. There is extensive discussion on whether the flexibility of RNA editing exerts a proteomic diversification role, or it just acts like hardwired mutations to correct the genomic allele. Eusocial insects evolved the ability to generate phenotypically differentiated individuals with the same genome, indicating the involvement of epigenetic/transcriptomic regulation. Methods We obtained the genomes of 104 Hymenoptera insects and the transcriptomes of representative species. Comparative genomic analysis was performed to parse the evolutionary trajectory of a regulatory Ile > Met auto-recoding site in Adar gene. Results At genome level, the pre-editing Ile codon is conserved across a node containing all eusocial hymenopterans. At RNA level, the editing events are confirmed in representative species and shows considerable condition-specificity. Compared to random expectation, the editable Ile codon avoids genomic substitutions to Met or to uneditable Ile codons, but does not avoid mutations to other unrelated amino acids. Conclusions The flexibility of Adar auto-recoding site in Hymenoptera is selectively maintained, supporting the flexible RNA editing hypothesis. We proposed a new angle to view the adaptation of RNA editing, providing another layer to explain the great phenotypical plasticity of eusocial insects.
The SnRK (sucrose non-fermentation-related protein kinase) plays an important role in regulating various signals in plants. However, as an important bamboo shoot and wood species, the response mechanism of PheSnRK in Phyllostachys edulis to hormones, low energy and stress remains unclear. In this paper, we focused on the structure, expression, and response of SnRK to hormones and sugars. In this study, we identified 75 PheSnRK genes from the Moso bamboo genome, which can be divided into three groups according to the evolutionary relationship. Cis-element analysis has shown that the PheSnRK gene can respond to various hormones, light, and stress. The PheSnRK2.9 proteins were localized in the nucleus and cytoplasm. Transgenic experiments showed that overexpression of PheSnRK2.9 inhibited root development, the plants were salt-tolerant and exhibited slowed starch consumption in Arabidopsis in the dark. The results of yeast one-hybrid and dual luciferase assay showed that PheIAAs and PheNACs can regulate PheSnRK2.9 gene expression by binding to the promoter of PheSnRK2.9. This study provided a comprehensive understanding of PheSnRK genes of Moso bamboo, which provides valuable information for further research on energy regulation mechanism and stress response during the growth and development of Moso bamboo.
BackgroundPoly (A) binding protein interacting protein 1 (PAIP1) has been shown to causally contribute to the development and progression of cancer. However, the mechanisms of the PAIP1 regulation in tumor cells remain poorly understood.ResultsHere, we used a recently developed UV cross-linking and RNA immunoprecipitation method (iRIP-seq) to map the direct and indirect interaction sites between PAIP1 and RNA on a transcriptome-wide level in HeLa cells. We found that PAIP1 not only binds to 3'UTRs, but also to pre-mRNAs/mRNAs with a strong bias towards the coding region and intron. PAIP1 binding sites are enriched in splicing enhancer consensus GA-rich motifs. RNA-seq analysis revealed that PAIP1 selectively modulates the alternative splicing of genes in some cancer hallmarks including cell migration, the mTOR signaling pathway and the HIF-1 signaling pathway. PAIP1-regulated alternative splicing events were strongly associated with PAIP1 binding, demonstrating that the binding may promote selection of the nearby splice sites. Deletion of a PAIP1 binding site containing seven repeats of GA motif reduced the PAIP1-mediated suppression of the exon 6 inclusion in a VEGFA mRNA isoform. Proteomic analysis of the PAIP1-interacted proteins revealed the enrichment of the spliceosome components and splicing factors.ConclusionsThese findings suggest that PAIP1 is both a polyadenylation and alternative splicing regulator, that may play a large role in RNA processing via its role in alternative splicing regulation.
BackgroundPhloem protein 2 (PP2), a dimeric lectin, is known for its involvement in plant responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. However, research on PP2 proteins in Moso bamboo is lacking.ResultsIn this study, comprehensive genome-wide analysis of the PP2-like gene family was conducted in Moso bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis), which has a significant economic and ecological value. Using HMMER3 search and InterPro domain analysis, 23 PP2-like genes (PhePP2-1 to PhePP2-23) were identified in the P. edulis genome. These genes were distributed across 12 chromosomal scaffolds, with proteins ranging from 216 to 556 amino acids in length. Phylogenetic analysis, including 163 PP2 proteins from eight plant species, revealed six distinct groups, with Group III and Group V being the largest. Gene structure and motif analyses indicated conserved domains across the PhePP2 proteins. In addition, Cis-element analysis of the promoter regions highlighted their potential regulatory roles in hormone, stress, and light responses. Expression pattern analysis using RNA-seq data showed differential expression of PhePP2 genes under drought, salt, salicylic acid, and abscisic acid treatments, indicating their involvement in stress response pathways. Furthermore, qPCR validation in different tissues and organs of Moso bamboo confirmed the expression profiles of the selected PhePP2 genes.ConclusionsThis study provides a comprehensive understanding of the functional roles of PP2-like genes in Moso bamboo and insights into their potential applications in enhancing stress tolerance and growth in plants.
BackgroundDNA storage has the advantages of large capacity, long-term stability, and low power consumption relative to other storage mediums, making it a promising new storage medium for multimedia information such as images. However, DNA storage has a low coding density and weak error correction ability.ResultsTo achieve more efficient DNA storage image reconstruction, we propose DNA-QLC (QRes-VAE and Levenshtein code (LC)), which uses the quantized ResNet VAE (QRes-VAE) model and LC for image compression and DNA sequence error correction, thus improving both the coding density and error correction ability. Experimental results show that the DNA-QLC encoding method can not only obtain DNA sequences that meet the combinatorial constraints, but also have a net information density that is 2.4 times higher than DNA Fountain. Furthermore, at a higher error rate (2%), DNA-QLC achieved image reconstruction with an SSIM value of 0.917.ConclusionsThe results indicate that the DNA-QLC encoding scheme guarantees the efficiency and reliability of the DNA storage system and improves the application potential of DNA storage for multimedia information such as images.
Hu sheep (HS), a breed of sheep carrying the FecB mutation gene, is known for its "year-round estrus and multiple births" and is an ideal model for studying the high fecundity mechanisms of livestock. Through analyzing and comparing the genomic selection features of Hu sheep and other sheep breeds, we identified a series of candidate genes that may play a role in Hu sheep's high fecundity mechanisms. In this study, we conducted whole-genome resequencing on six breeds and screened key mutations significantly correlated with high reproductive traits in sheep. Notably, the CC2D1B gene was selected by the fixation index (F ST) and the cross-population composite likelihood ratio (XP-CLR) methods in HS and other five breeds. It was worth noting that the CC2D1B gene in HS was different from that in other sheep breeds, and seven missense mutations have been identified. Furthermore, the linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis revealed a strong linkage disequilibrium in this specific gene region. Subsequently, by performing different grouping based on FecB genotypes in Hu sheep, genome-wide selective signal analysis screened several genes related to reproduction, such as BMPR1B and PPM1K. Besides, F ST analysis identified functional genes related to reproductive traits, including RHEB, HSPA2, PPP1CC, HVCN1, and CCDC63. Additionally, a missense mutation was found in the CCDC63 gene and the haplotype was different between the high reproduction (HR) group and low reproduction (LR) group in HS. In summary, we discovered genetic differentiation among six distinct breeding sheep breeds at the whole genome level. Additionally, we identified a set of genes which were associated with reproductive performance in Hu sheep and visualized how these genes differed in different breeds. These findings laid a theoretical foundation for understanding genetic mechanisms behind high prolific traits in sheep.
BackgroundSouth China carp (Cyprinus carpio rubrofuscus), which is an economically important species, is traditionally cocultured with rice. Our previous study indicated that approximately 10-30% of these fish experienced growth arrest, severely impacting production. However, the molecular mechanism underlying growth inhibition in south China carp is currently unknown.ResultsIn this study, we compared the transcriptomes of the livers, muscles and intestines of carp in the fast-growing and slow-growing groups. We identified 2182, 2355 and 916 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), respectively. In the slow-growing group, the oxidative phosphorylation pathway was significantly upregulated in the liver. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) confirmed mitochondrial damage in the liver, which was characterized by broken cristae and heterogeneous matrix. Additionally, analysis of antioxidant enzyme and transaminase activity also revealed that the livers in slow-growing individuals were unhealthy. In muscle tissue, the mitophagy and autophagy pathways were significantly dysregulated. Consequently, manifestations of mitochondrial damage and sparse myofilaments were clearly observed in slow-growing south China carp via TEM. Furthermore, pathways that regulate cell proliferation and migration, including the ECM receptor and focal adhesion, were significantly enriched in the intestine. Morphological examination revealed that the villus height and muscular layer height in the slow-growing group were significantly shorter than those in the fast-growing group, suggesting decreased intestinal cell motility. Overall, our study elucidated mitochondrial damage in the liver and muscle and detected morphological changes in intestinal villi.ConclusionsIn summary, our results help elucidate the genetic architecture related to growth arrest in south China carp and provide a basis for further research on the growth of teleosts.
BackgroundCell type prediction is crucial to cell type identification of genomics, cancer diagnosis and drug development, and it can solve the time-consuming and difficult problem of cell classification in biological experiments. Therefore, a computational method is urgently needed to classify and predict cell types using single-cell Hi-C data. In previous studies, there is a lack of convenient and accurate method to predict cell types based on single-cell Hi-C data. Deep neural networks can form complex representations of single-cell Hi-C data and make it possible to handle the multidimensional and sparse biological datasets.ResultsWe compare the performance of SCANN with existing methods and analyze the model by using five different evaluation metrics. When using only ML1 and ML3 datasets, the ARI and NMI values of SCANN increase by 14% and 11% over those of scHiCluster respectively. However, when using all six libraries of data, the ARI and NMI values of SCANN increase by 63% and 88% over those of scHiCluster respectively. These findings show that SCANN is highly accurate in predicting the type of independent cell samples using single-cell Hi-C data.ConclusionsSCANN enhances the training speed and requires fewer resources for predicting cell types. In addition, when the number of cells in different cell types was extremely unbalanced, SCANN has higher stability and flexibility in solving cell classification and cell type prediction using the single-cell Hi-C data. This predication method can assist biologists to study the differences in the chromosome structure of cells between different cell types.
Background The short-read whole-genome sequencing (WGS) approach has been widely applied to investigate the genomic variation in the natural populations of many plant species. With the rapid advancements in long-read sequencing and genome assembly technologies, high-quality genome sequences are available for a group of varieties for many plant species. These genome sequences are expected to help researchers comprehensively investigate any type of genomic variants that are missed by the WGS technology. However, multiple genome alignment (MGA) tools designed by the human genome research community might be unsuitable for plant genomes. Results To fill this gap, we developed the AnchorWave-Cactus Multiple Genome Alignment (ACMGA) pipeline, which improved the alignment of repeat elements and could identify long (> 50 bp) deletions or insertions (INDELs). We conducted MGA using ACMGA and Cactus for 8 Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and 26 Maize (Zea mays) de novo assembled genome sequences and compared them with the previously published short-read variant calling results. MGA identified more single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and long INDELs than did previously published WGS variant callings. Additionally, ACMGA detected significantly more SNVs and long INDELs in repetitive regions and the whole genome than did Cactus. Compared with the results of Cactus, the results of ACMGA were more similar to the previously published variants called using short-read. These two MGA pipelines identified numerous multi-allelic variants that were missed by the WGS variant calling pipeline. Conclusions Aligning d e novo assembled genome sequences could identify more SNVs and INDELs than mapping short-read. ACMGA combines the advantages of AnchorWave and Cactus and offers a practical solution for plant MGA by integrating global alignment, a 2-piece-affine-gap cost strategy, and the progressive MGA algorithm.
Background The DELLA proteins, a class of GA signaling repressors, belong to the GRAS family of plant-specific nuclear proteins. Members of DELLA gene family encode transcriptional regulators with diverse functions in plant development and abiotic stress responses. To date, DELLAs have been identified in various plant species, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, Malus domestica, Populus trichocarpa, and other land plants. Most information of DELLA family genes was obtained from A. thaliana, whereas little is known about the DELLA gene family in blueberry. Results In this study, we identified three DELLA genes in blueberry (Vaccinium darrowii, VdDELLA) and provided a complete overview of VdDELLA gene family, describing chromosome localization, protein properties, conserved domain, motif organization, and phylogenetic analysis. Three VdDELLA members, containing two highly conserved DELLA domain and GRAS domain, were distributed across three chromosomes. Additionally, cis-acting elements analysis indicated that VdDELLA genes might play a critical role in blueberry developmental processes, hormone, and stress responses. Expression analysis using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) revealed that all of three VdDELLA genes were differentially expressed across various tissues. VdDELLA2 was the most highly expressed VdDELLA in all denoted tissues, with a highest expression in mature fruits. In addition, all of the three VdDELLA genes actively responded to diverse abiotic stresses. Based on qRT-PCR analysis, VdDELLA2 might act as a key regulator in V. darrowii in response to salt stress, whereas VdDELLA1 and VdDELLA2 might play an essential role in cold stress response. Under drought stress, all of three VdDELLA genes were involved in mediating drought response. Furthermore, their transiently co-localization with nuclear markers in A. thaliana protoplasts demonstrated their transcriptional regulator roles. Conclusions In this study, three VdDELLA genes were identified in V. darrowii genome. Three VdDELLA genes were closely related to the C. moschata DELLA genes, S. lycopersicum DELLA genes, and M. domestica DELLA genes, respectively, indicating their similar biological functions. Expression analysis indicated that VdDELLA genes were highly efficient in blueberry fruit development. Expression patterns under different stress conditions revealed the differentially expressed VdDELLA genes responding to salt, drought, and cold stress. Overall, these results enrich our understanding of evolutionary relationship and potential functions of VdDELLA genes, which provide valuable information for further studies on genetic improvement of the plant yield and plant resistance.
Background Purple non-heading Chinese cabbage [Brassica campestris (syn. Brassica rapa) ssp. chinensis] has become popular because of its richness in anthocyanin. However, anthocyanin only accumulates in the upper epidermis of leaves. Further studies are needed to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the specific accumulation of it. Results In this study, we used the laser capture frozen section method (LCM) to divide purple (ZBC) and green (LBC) non-heading Chinese cabbage leaves into upper and lower epidermis parts (Pup represents the purple upper epidermis, Plow represents the purple lower epidermis, Gup represents the green upper epidermis, Glow represents the green lower epidermis). Through transcriptome sequencing, we found that the DIHYDROFLAVONOL 4-REDUCTASE-encoding gene BcDFR, is strongly expressed in Pup but hardly in others (Plow, Gup, Glow). Further, a deletion and insertion in the promoter of BcDFR in LBC were found, which may interfere with BcDFR expression. Subsequent analysis of gene structure and conserved structural domains showed that BcDFR is highly conserved in Brassica species. The predicted protein-protein interaction network of BcDFR suggests that it interacts with almost all functional proteins in the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway. Finally, the results of the tobacco transient expression also demonstrated that BcDFR promotes the synthesis and accumulation of anthocyanin. Conclusions BcDFR is specifically highly expressed on the upper epidermis of purple non-heading Chinese cabbage leaves and regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis and accumulation. Our study provides new insights into the functional analysis and transcriptional regulatory network of anthocyanin-related genes in purple non-heading Chinese cabbage.
Geoherb usually represents high-quality medicinal herbs with better clinical therapeutic effects, and elucidating the geoherbalism is essential for the quality improvement of traditional Chinese Medicine. However, few researches were conducted to clarify the geoherbalism based on a large scale of transcriptomics. In the present study, we compared the transcriptomes of Rheum palmatum complex derived from top-geoherb and non-geoherb areas to show the geoherbalism properties of rhubarb. A total of 412.32 Gb clean reads were obtained with unigene numbers of 100,615 after assembly. Based on the obtained transcriptome datasets, key enzyme-encoding genes involved in the anthraquinones biosynthesis were also obtained. We also found that 21 anthraquinone-related unigenes were differentially expressed between two different groups, and some of these DEGs were correlated to the content accumulation of five free anthraquinones, indicating that the gene expression profiles may promote the geoherbalism formation of rhubarb. In addition, the selective pressure analyses indicated that most paired orthologous genes between these two groups were subject to negative selection, and only a low proportion of orthologs under positive selection were detected. Functional annotation analyses indicated that these positive-selected genes related to the functions such as gene expression, substance transport, stress response and metabolism, indicating that discrepant environment also enhanced the formation of geoherbalism. Our study not only provided insights for the genetic mechanism of geoherbalism of rhubarb, but also laid more genetic cues for the future rhubarb germplasms improvement and utilization.
BackgroundRice, as one of the most important staple crops, its genetic improvement plays a crucial role in agricultural production and food security. Although extensive research has utilized single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) data to explore the genetic basis of important agronomic traits in rice improvement, reports on the role of other types of variations, such as insertions and deletions (INDELs), are still limited.ResultsIn this study, we extracted INDELs from resequencing data of 148 rice improved varieties. We identified 938,585 INDELs and found that as the length of the variation increases, the number of variations decreases, with 89.0% of INDELs being 2-10 bp. The highest number of INDELs was found on chromosome 1, while the least was on chromosome 10. INDELs were unevenly distributed across the genome, generating a total of 33 hotspot regions. 47.0% of INDELs were located within 2 kb upstream and downstream of genes. Using phenotypic data from five agronomic traits (heading date, flag leaf length, flag leaf width, panicle number, and plant height) along with INDEL data to perform genome-wide association study (GWAS), we identified 6,331 significant loci involving 157 cloned genes. Haplotype analysis of candidate genes revealed INDELs affecting important functional genes, such as OsMED25 and OsRRMh related to heading date, and MOC2 related to plant height.ConclusionsOur work analyzed the variation patterns of INDELs in rice improvement and identified INDELs associated with agronomic traits. These results will provide valuable genetic and material resources for the genetic improvement of rice.
Background The C2H2 zinc finger protein family plays important roles in plants. However, precisely how C2H2s function in Opisthopappus (Opisthopappus taihangensis and Opisthopappus longilobus) remains unclear. Results In this study, a total of 69 OpC2H2 zinc finger protein genes were identified and clustered into five Groups. Seven tandem and ten fragment repeats were found in OpC2H2s, which underwent robust purifying selection. Of the identified motifs, motif 1 was present in all OpC2H2s and conserved at important binding sites. Most OpC2H2s possessed few introns and exons that could rapidly activate and react when faced with stress. The OpC2H2 promoter sequences mainly contained diverse regulatory elements, such as ARE, ABRE, and LTR. Under salt stress, two up-regulated OpC2H2s (OpC2H2-1 and OpC2H2-14) genes and one down-regulated OpC2H2 gene (OpC2H2-7) might serve as key transcription factors through the ABA and JA signaling pathways to regulate the growth and development of Opisthopappus species. Conclusion The above results not only help to understand the function of C2H2 gene family but also drive progress in genetic improvement for the salt tolerance of Opisthopappus species.
Background The hair follicle development process is regulated by sophisticated genes and signaling networks, and the hair grows from the hair follicle. The Tianzhu white yak population exhibits differences in hair length, especially on the forehead and shoulder region. However, the genetic mechanism is still unclear. Isoform sequencing (Iso-seq) technology with advantages in long reads sequencing. Hence, we combined the Iso-seq and RNA-seq methods to investigate the transcript complexity and difference between long-haired yak (LHY) and normal-haired yak (NHY). Results The hair length measurement result showed a significant difference between LHY and NHY on the forehead and the shoulder (P-value < 0.001). The skin samples from the forehead and the shoulder of LHY and NHY were pooled for isoform sequencing (Iso-seq). We obtained numerous long transcripts, including novel isoforms, long non-coding RNA, alternative splicing events, and alternative polyadenylation events. Combined with RNA-seq data, we performed differential isoforms (DEIs) analysis between LHY and NHY. We found that some hair follicle and skin development-related DEIs, like BMP4, KRT2, IGF2R, and COL1A2 in the forehead skin; BMP1, KRT1, FGF5, COL2A1, and IGFBP5 in the shoulder skin. Enrichment analysis revealed that DEIs in both two comparable groups significantly participated in skin and hair follicle development-related pathways, like ECM-receptor interaction, focal adhesion, and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways. The results indicated that the hair follicle development of Tianzhu white yak may influence the hair length difference. Besides, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of DEIs showed COL2A1 and COL3A1 exhibited a high degree of centrality, and these two genes were suggested as potential candidates for the hair length growth of Tianzhu white yak. Conclusions The results provided a comprehensive analysis of the transcriptome complexity and identified differential transcripts that enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the variation in hair length growth in Tianzhu white yak.
BackgroundAcute diarrhea, dehydration and death in piglets are all symptoms of transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), which results in significant financial losses in the pig industry. It is important to understand the pathogenesis and identify new antiviral targets by revealing the metabolic interactions between TGEV and host cells.ResultsWe performed metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses of swine testicular cells infected with TGEV. A total of 1339 differential metabolites and 206 differentially expressed genes were detected post TEGV infection. The differentially expressed genes were significantly enriched in the HIF-1 signaling pathway and PI3K-Akt signaling. Integrated analysis of differentially expressed genes and differential metabolites indicated that they were significantly enriched in the metabolic processes such as nucleotide metabolism, biosynthesis of cofactors and purine metabolism. In addition, the results showed that most of the detected metabolites involved in the bile secretion was downregulated during TGEV infection. Furthermore, exogenous addition of key metabolite deoxycholic acid (DCA) significantly enhanced TGEV replication by NF-kappa B and STAT3 signal pathways.ConclusionsWe identified a significant metabolite, DCA, related to TGEV replication. It added TGEV replication in host cells by inhibiting phosphorylation of NF-kappa B and STAT3. This study provided novel insights into the metabolomic and transcriptomic alterations related to TGEV infection and revealed potential molecular and metabolic targets for the regulation of TGEV infection.
BackgroundArchived samples, including frozen and formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues, are a vast resource of clinically annotated materials for the application of high-definition genomics to improve patient management and provide a molecular basis for the delivery of personalized cancer therapeutics. Notably, FFPE tissues are stable, provide repeat sampling of tissues of interest, and can be stored indefinitely at ambient temperature. The development of single cell DNA sequencing (scDNA-seq) technologies provides an unparalleled opportunity for the study of tumor heterogeneity and the identification of often rare subclonal cell populations that drive tumor evolution and progression to advanced therapy resistant disease. However, major limitations to the use of archived tissues for scDNA-seq include the low yields of intact cells in the presence of high levels of subcellular debris in biopsies, and the highly variable quantity and quality of the DNA extracted from samples of interest. The latter is of high significance for the use of FFPE tissues due to the presence of DNA-protein crosslinks. In addition, many samples, notably tumors arising in solid tissues, contain admixtures of reactive stroma, inflammatory cells, and necrosis in immediate contact with tumor cells.ResultsTo expand their use for translational studies, we optimized flow sorting and sequencing of single nuclei from archived fresh frozen (FF) and FFPE tumor tissues. Our methods, which include isolation of intact nuclei suitable for library preparations, quality control (QC) metrics for each step, and a single cell sequencing bioinformatic processing and analysis pipeline, were validated with flow sorted nuclei from matching FF and FFPE ovarian cancer surgical samples and a sequencing panel of 553 amplicons targeting single nucleotide and copy number variants in genes of interest.ConclusionsOur flow sorting based protocol provides intact nuclei suitable for snDNA-seq from archival FF and FFPE tissues. Furthermore, we have developed QC steps that optimize the preparation and selection of samples for deep single cell clonal profiling. Our data processing pipeline captures rare subclones in tumors with highly variable genomes based on variants in genes of interest.
Background Garuga Roxb. is a genus endemic to southwest China and other tropical regions in Southeast Asia facing risk of extinction due to the loss of tropical forests and changes in land use. Conducting a genome survey of G. forrestii contribute to a deeper understanding and conservation of the genus.ResultsThis study utilized genome survey of G. forrestii generated approximately 54.56 GB of sequence data, with approximately 112 x coverage. K-mer analysis indicated a genome size of approximately 0.48 GB, smaller than 0.52GB estimated by flow cytometry. The heterozygosity is of about 0.54%, and a repeat rate of around 51.54%. All the shotgun data were assembled into 339,729 scaffolds, with an N50 of 17,344 bp. The average content of guanine and cytosine was approximately 35.16%. A total of 330,999 SSRs were detected, with mononucleotide repeats being the most abundant at 70.16%, followed by dinucleotide repeats at 20.40%. We conducted a preliminary ploidy assessment using Smudgeplot and observed a clear bimodal distribution in G. forrestii at 1/2 relative coverage depth and total coverage depth (2n), suggesting a potential diploid genome structure. A pseudo chromosome of G. forrestii and a gemone of Boswellia sacra were used as reference genome to perform a primer population resequencing analysis within three Garuga species. Principal component analysis (PCA) indicated three distinct groups, but genome wide phylogenetics represented conflicting both between the dataset of different reference genomes and between maternal and nuclear genome.ConclusionIn summary, the genome of G. forrestii is small, and the phylogenetic relationships within the Garuga genus are complex. The genetic data presented in this study holds significant value for comprehensive whole-genome analyses, the evaluation of population genetic diversity, investigations into adaptive evolution, the advancement of artificial breeding efforts, and the support of species conservation and restoration initiatives. Ultimately, this research contributes to reinforcing the conservation and management of natural ecosystems, promoting biodiversity conservation, and advancing sustainable development.
Background With the improvement of living standards, the quality of chicken has become a significant concern. Chinese Dagu Chicken (dual-purpose type) and Arbor Acres plus broiler (AA+ broiler) (meat-type) were selected as the research subjects in this study, the meat quality of the breast and leg muscles were measured. However, the molecular mechanism(s) underlying regulation of muscle development are not yet fully elucidated. Therefore, finding molecular markers or major genes that regulate muscle quality has become a crucial breakthrough in chicken breeding. Unraveling the molecular mechanism behind meat traits in chicken and other domestic fowl is facilitated by identifying the key genes associated with these developmental events. Here, a comparative transcriptomic analysis of chicken meat was conducted on breast muscles (BM) and leg muscles (LM) in AA+ broilers (AA) and Dagu chicken (DG) to explore the differences in their meat traits employing RNA-seq. Results Twelve cDNA libraries of BM and LM from AA and DG were constructed from four experimental groups, yielding 14,464 genes. Among them, Dagu chicken breast muscles (DGB) vs AA+ broilers breast muscles (AAB) showed 415 upregulated genes and 449 downregulated genes, Dagu chicken leg muscles (DGL) vs AA+ broilers leg muscles (AAL) exhibited 237 upregulated genes and 278 downregulated genes, DGL vs DGB demonstrated 391 upregulated genes and 594 downregulated genes, and AAL vs AAB displayed 122 upregulated genes and 154 downregulated genes. 13 genes, including nine upregulated genes (COX5A, COX7C, NDUFV1, UQCRFS1, UQCR11, BRT-1, FGF14, TMOD1, MYOZ2) and four downregulated genes (MYBPC3, MYO7B, MTMR7, and TNNC1), were found to be associated with the oxidative phosphorylation signaling pathway. Further analysis revealed that the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from muscle were enriched in various pathways, such as metabolic pathways, oxidative phosphorylation, carbon metabolism, glycolysis, extracellular matrix-receptor interaction, biosynthesis of amino acids, focal adhesion, vascular smooth muscle contraction, and cardiac muscle contraction, all of which are involved in muscle development and metabolism. This study also measured the meat quality of the breast and leg muscles from the two breeds, which demonstrated superior overall meat quality in Chinese Dagu Chicken compared to the AA+ broiler. Conclusions Our findings show that the meat quality of dual-purpose breeds (Chinese Dagu chicken) is higher than meat-type (AA+ broiler), which may be related to the DEGs regulating muscle development and metabolism. Our findings also provide transcriptomic insights for a comparative analysis of molecular mechanisms underlying muscle development between the two breeds, and have practical implications for the improvement of chicken breeding practices.
BackgroundIntramuscular fat (IMF) is an important factor in meat quality, and triglyceride (TG) and Phospholipids (PLIP), as the main components of IMF, are of great significance to the improvement of meat quality.ResultsIn this study, we used 30 RNA sequences generated from the transcriptome of chicken breast muscle tissues at different developmental stages to construct a gene expression matrix to map RNA sequence reads to the chicken genome and identify the transcript of origin. We used weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and identified 27 co-expression modules, 10 of which were related to TG and PLIP. We identified 150 highly-connected hub genes related to TG and PLIP, respectively, which were found to be mainly enriched in the adipocytokine signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, mTOR signaling pathway, FoxO signaling pathway, and TGF-beta signaling pathway. Additionally, using the BioMart database, we identified 134 and 145 candidate genes related to fat development in the TG-related module and PLIP-related module, respectively. Among them, RPS6KB1, BRCA1, CDK1, RPS3, PPARGC1A, ACSL1, NDUFAB1, NDUFA9, ATP5B and PRKAG2 were identified as candidate genes related to fat development and highly-connected hub genes in the module, suggesting that these ten genes may be important candidate genes affecting IMF deposition.ConclusionsRPS6KB1, BRCA1, CDK1, RPS3, PPARGC1A, ACSL1, NDUFAB1, NDUFA9, ATP5B and PRKAG2 may be important candidate genes affecting IMF deposition. The purpose of this study was to identify the co-expressed gene modules related to chicken IMF deposition using WGCNA and determine key genes related to IMF deposition, so as to lay a foundation for further research on the molecular regulation mechanism underlying chicken fat deposition.
BackgroundGRAS is a family of plant-specific transcription factors (TFs) that play a vital role in plant growth and development and response to adversity stress. However, systematic studies of the GRAS TF family in kiwifruit have not been reported.ResultsIn this study, we used a bioinformatics approach to identify eighty-six AcGRAS TFs located on twenty-six chromosomes and phylogenetic analysis classified them into ten subfamilies. It was found that the gene structure is relatively conserved for these genes and that fragmental duplication is the prime force for the evolution of AcGRAS genes. However, the promoter region of the AcGRAS genes mainly contains cis-acting elements related to hormones and environmental stresses, similar to the results of GO and KEGG enrichment analysis, suggesting that hormone signaling pathways of the AcGRAS family play a vital role in regulating plant growth and development and adversity stress. Protein interaction network analysis showed that the AcGRAS51 protein is a relational protein linking DELLA, SCR, and SHR subfamily proteins. The results demonstrated that 81 genes were expressed in kiwifruit AcGRAS under salt stress, including 17 differentially expressed genes, 13 upregulated, and four downregulated. This indicates that the upregulated AcGRAS55, AcGRAS69, AcGRAS86 and other GRAS genes can reduce the salt damage caused by kiwifruit plants by positively regulating salt stress, thus improving the salt tolerance of the plants.ConclusionsThese results provide a theoretical basis for future exploration of the characteristics and functions of more AcGRAS genes. This study provides a basis for further research on kiwifruit breeding for resistance to salt stress. RT-qPCR analysis showed that the expression of 3 AcGRAS genes was elevated under salt stress, indicating that AcGRAS exhibited a specific expression pattern under salt stress conditions.
Background Peach bacterial shot hole, caused by Xanthomonas arboricola pv pruni (Xap), is a global bacterial disease that poses a threat to the yield and quality of cultivated peach trees (Prunus persica). Results This study compared the mRNA and miRNA profiles of two peach varieties, 'Yanbao' (resistant) and 'Yingzui' (susceptible), after inoculation with Xap to identify miRNAs and target genes associated with peach tree resistance. mRNA sequencing results revealed that in the S0-vs-S3 comparison group, 1574 genes were upregulated and 3975 genes were downregulated. In the R0-vs-R3 comparison group, 1575 genes were upregulated and 3726 genes were downregulated. Through miRNA sequencing, a total of 112 known miRNAs belonging to 70 miRNA families and 111 new miRNAs were identified. Notably, some miRNAs were exclusively expressed in either resistant or susceptible varieties. Additionally, 59 miRNAs were downregulated and 69 miRNAs were upregulated in the R0-vs-R3 comparison group, while 46 miRNAs were downregulated and 52 miRNAs were upregulated in the S0-vs-S3 comparison group. Joint analysis of mRNA and miRNA identified 79 relationship pairs in the S0-vs-S3 comparison group, consisting of 48 miRNAs and 51 target genes. In the R0-vs-R3 comparison group, there were 58 relationship pairs, comprising 28 miRNAs and 20 target genes. Several target genes related to resistance, such as SPL6, TIFY6B, and Prupe.4G041800_v2.0.a1 (PPO), were identified through literature reports and GO/KEGG enrichment analysis. Conclusion In conclusion, this study discovered several candidate genes involved in peach tree resistance by analyzing differential expression of mRNA and miRNA. These findings provide valuable insights into the mechanisms underlying resistance to Xap in peach trees.
Bergenia purpurascens is an important medicinal, edible and ornamental plant. The lack of omics information hinders the study of its metabolic pathways and related genes. In order to investigate candidate genes and pathways involved in secondary metabolism in B. purpurascens, roots, stems and leaves of B. purpurascens were subjected to metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses in this study. A total of 351 differentially accumulated secondary metabolites were identified. We identified 120 candidate genes involved in phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis pathway, from which 29 key candidate genes were obtained by WGCNA. Five UDP-Glycosyltransferases and four O-methyltransferases were suggested to be the candidate enzymes involved in synthetic pathway from gallic acid to bergenin by correlation analysis between transcriptional and metabolic levels and phylogenetic analysis. This study provides data resources and new insights for further studies on the biosynthesis of major active components in B. purpurascens.
BackgroundHericium coralloides is a traditional edible and medicinal mushroom. Light is a key factor in forming fruiting bodies of fungi; however, the effects of different light on the yield and morphogenesis of H. coralloides are still unknown. Therefore, the morphology, yield, and transcriptome of H. coralloides under blue, red, and white light conditions were investigated.ResultFruiting bodies under blue light exhibited superior morphological traits, such as milky white color, larger size, elongated stalks, and higher spine count, leading to higher yields. Different light treatments led to dramatic transcriptome changes ranging from 10,827 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) induced by blue light in Blue-4d to 11,375 DEGs induced by red light in Red-4d and accounted for 64.56% to 67.81% of all expressed genes. This massive amount of light-responsive genes has never been reported in fungi. Gene Ontology analysis showed that light affected nearly all aspects of life in H. coralloides; suggesting that the influence of light on fungi may have been underestimated. Blue light-induced yield increment may be achieved by specifically upregulating the growth-related processes such as DNA replication, chromosomes, and cell division.ConclusionsThis study offers preliminary insights into the potential role of blue light in modulating gene expression and yield stimulation in H. coralloides, potentially improving cultivation practice.
Camellia oleifera is an important woody oil tree in China, in which the flowers and fruits appear during the same period. The endogenous hormone changes and transcription expression levels in different parts of the flower tissue (sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils), flower buds, leaves, and seeds of Changlin 23 high-yield (H), Changlin low-yield (L), and control (CK) C. oleifera groups were studied. The abscisic acid (ABA) content in the petals and stamens in the L group was significantly higher than that in the H and CK groups, which may be related to flower and fruit drops. The high N6-isopentenyladenine (iP) and indole acetic acid (IAA) contents in the flower buds may be associated with a high yield. Comparative transcriptome analysis showed that the protein phosphatase 2C (PP2C), jasmonate-zim-domain protein (JAZ), and WRKY-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) may play an important role in determining leaf color. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) comparison showed that jasmonic acid (JA) and cytokinin play an important role in determining the pistil of the H group. In this study, endogenous hormone and transcriptome analyses were carried out to identify the factors influencing the large yield difference in C. oleifera in the same year, which provides a theoretical basis for C. oleifera in the future.
Background Herpetospermum pedunculosum (Ser.) C. B. Clarke is a traditional Chinese herbal medicine that heavily relies on the lignans found in its dried ripe seeds (Herpetospermum caudigerum), which have antioxidant and hepatoprotective functions. However, little is known regarding the lignan biosynthesis in H. pedunculosum. In this study, we used metabolomic (non-targeted UHPLC-MS/MS) and transcriptome (RNA-Seq) analyses to identify key metabolites and genes (both structural and regulatory) associated with lignan production during the green mature (GM) and yellow mature (YM) stages of H. pedunculosum. Results The contents of 26 lignan-related metabolites and the expression of 30 genes involved in the lignan pathway differed considerably between the GM and YM stages; most of them were more highly expressed in YM than in GM. UPLC-Q-TOF/MS confirmed that three Herpetospermum-specific lignans (including herpetrione, herpetotriol, and herpetin) were found in YM, but were not detected in GM. In addition, we proposed a lignan biosynthesis pathway for H. pedunculosum based on the fundamental principles of chemistry and biosynthesis. An integrated study of the transcriptome and metabolome identified several transcription factors, including HpGAF1, HpHSFB3, and HpWOX1, that were highly correlated with the metabolism of lignan compounds during seed ripening. Furthermore, functional validation assays revealed that the enzyme 4-Coumarate: CoA ligase (4CL) catalyzes the synthesis of hydroxycinnamate CoA esters. Conclusion These results will deepen our understanding of seed lignan biosynthesis and establish a theoretical basis for molecular breeding of H. pedunculosum.
Background/ObjectivesThis study aims to elucidate the genetic causes of congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH), a rare genetic disorder resulting in GnRH deficiency, in six families from Pakistan.MethodsEighteen DNA samples from six families underwent genome sequencing followed by standard evaluation for pathogenic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small indels. All families were subsequently analyzed for pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) using CoverageMaster.ResultsNovel pathogenic homozygous SNVs in known CHH genes were identified in four families: two families with variants in GNRHR, and two others harboring KISS1R variants. Subsequent investigation of CNVs in the remaining two families identified novel unique large deletions in ANOS1.ConclusionA combined, systematic analysis of single nucleotide and CNVs helps to improve the diagnostic yield for variants in patients with CHH.
BackgroundRahnella perminowiae S11P1 and Variovorax sp. S12S4 are two plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria that were previously isolated from the rhizosphere of Crocus sativus L. (saffron), and have demonstrated interesting PGP activities and promising results when used as inoculants in field trials. To further elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying their beneficial effects on plant growth, comprehensive genome mining of S11P1 and S12S4 and comparative genomic analysis with closely related strains were conducted. ResultsFunctional annotation of the two strains predicted a large number of genes involved in auxin and siderophore production, nitrogen fixation, sulfur metabolism, organic acid biosynthesis, pyrroloquinoline quinone production, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) deaminase activity, volatile organic compounds production, and polyamine biosynthesis. In addition, numerous genes implicated in plant-bacteria interactions, such as those involved in chemotaxis and quorum sensing, were predicted. Moreover, the two strains carried genes involved in bacterial fitness under abiotic stress conditions. Comparative genomic analysis revealed an open pan-genomic structure for the two strains. COG annotation showed that higher fractions of core and accessory genes were involved in the metabolism and transport of carbohydrates and amino acids, suggesting the metabolic versatility of the two strains as effective rhizosphere colonizers. Furthermore, this study reports the first comparison of Multilocus sequence analysis (MLSA) and core-based phylogenies of the Rahnella and Variovorax genera. ConclusionsThe present study unveils the molecular mechanisms underlying plant growth promotion and biocontrol activity of S11P1 and S12S4, and provides a basis for their further biotechnological application in agriculture.
