The advent of genome-wide ancient DNA analysis has revolutionized our understanding of prehistoric societies. However, studying biological relatedness in these groups requires tailored approaches due to the challenges of analyzing ancient DNA. READv2, an optimized Python3 implementation of the most widely used tool for this purpose, addresses these challenges while surpassing its predecessor in speed and accuracy. For sufficient amounts of data, it can classify up to third-degree relatedness and differentiate between the two types of first-degree relatedness, full siblings and parent-offspring. READv2 enables user-friendly, efficient, and nuanced analysis of biological relatedness, facilitating a deeper understanding of past social structures.
BackgroundDrug targets with genetic evidence are expected to increase clinical success by at least twofold. Yet, translating disease-associated genetic variants into functional knowledge remains a fundamental challenge of drug discovery. A key issue is that the vast majority of complex disease associations cannot be cleanly mapped to a gene. Immune disease-associated variants are enriched within regulatory elements found in T-cell-specific open chromatin regions.ResultsTo identify genes and molecular programs modulated by these regulatory elements, we develop a CRISPRi-based single-cell functional screening approach in primary human T cells. Our pipeline enables the interrogation of transcriptomic changes induced by the perturbation of regulatory elements at scale. We first optimize an efficient CRISPRi protocol in primary CD4+ T cells via CROPseq vectors. Subsequently, we perform a screen targeting 45 non-coding regulatory elements and 35 transcription start sites and profile approximately 250,000 T -cell single-cell transcriptomes. We develop a bespoke analytical pipeline for element-to-gene (E2G) mapping and demonstrate that our method can identify both previously annotated and novel E2G links. Lastly, we integrate genetic association data for immune-related traits and demonstrate how our platform can aid in the identification of effector genes for GWAS loci.ConclusionsWe describe "primary T cell crisprQTL" - a scalable, single-cell functional genomics approach for mapping regulatory elements to genes in primary human T cells. We show how this framework can facilitate the interrogation of immune disease GWAS hits and propose that the combination of experimental and QTL-based techniques is likely to address the variant-to-function problem.
BackgroundEarly embryonic developmental programs are guided by the coordinated interplay between maternally inherited and zygotically manufactured RNAs and proteins. Although these processes happen concomitantly and affecting gene function during this period is bound to affect both pools of mRNAs, it has been challenging to study their expression dynamics separately.ResultsBy employing SLAM-seq, a nascent mRNA labeling transcriptomic approach, in a developmental time series we observe that over half of the early zebrafish embryo transcriptome consists of maternal-zygotic genes, emphasizing their pivotal role in early embryogenesis. We provide an hourly resolution of de novo transcriptional activation events and follow nascent mRNA trajectories, finding that most de novo transcriptional events are stable throughout this period. Additionally, by blocking microRNA-430 function, a key post transcriptional regulator during zebrafish embryogenesis, we directly show that it destabilizes hundreds of de novo transcribed mRNAs from pure zygotic as well as maternal-zygotic genes. This unveils a novel miR-430 function during embryogenesis, fine-tuning zygotic gene expression.ConclusionThese insights into zebrafish early embryo transcriptome dynamics emphasize the significance of post-transcriptional regulators in zygotic genome activation. The findings pave the way for future investigations into the coordinated interplay between transcriptional and post-transcriptional landscapes required for the establishment of animal cell identities and functions.
Copy number alterations (CNAs) are among the most important genetic events in cancer, but their detection from sequencing data is challenging because of unknown sample purity, tumor ploidy, and general intra-tumor heterogeneity. Here, we present CNAqc, an evolution-inspired method to perform the computational validation of clonal and subclonal CNAs detected from bulk DNA sequencing. CNAqc is validated using single-cell data and simulations, is applied to over 4000 TCGA and PCAWG samples, and is incorporated into the validation process for the clinically accredited bioinformatics pipeline at Genomics England. CNAqc is designed to support automated quality control procedures for tumor somatic data validation.
Assembled genome sequences are being generated at an exponential rate. Here we present FCS-GX, part of NCBI's Foreign Contamination Screen (FCS) tool suite, optimized to identify and remove contaminant sequences in new genomes. FCS-GX screens most genomes in 0.1-10 min. Testing FCS-GX on artificially fragmented genomes demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity for diverse contaminant species. We used FCS-GX to screen 1.6 million GenBank assemblies and identified 36.8 Gbp of contamination, comprising 0.16% of total bases, with half from 161 assemblies. We updated assemblies in NCBI RefSeq to reduce detected contamination to 0.01% of bases. FCS-GX is available at https://github.com/ncbi/fcs/ or https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10651084.
BackgroundIn rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the activation of T and B cell clones specific for self-antigens leads to the chronic inflammation of the synovium. Here, we perform an in-depth quantitative analysis of the seven chains that comprise the adaptive immune receptor repertoire (AIRR) in RA.ResultsIn comparison to controls, we show that RA patients have multiple and strong differences in the B cell receptor repertoire including reduced diversity as well as altered isotype, chain, and segment frequencies. We demonstrate that therapeutic tumor necrosis factor inhibition partially restores this alteration but find a profound difference in the underlying biochemical reactivities between responders and non-responders. Combining the AIRR with HLA typing, we identify the specific T cell receptor repertoire associated with disease risk variants. Integrating these features, we further develop a molecular classifier that shows the utility of the AIRR as a diagnostic tool.ConclusionsSimultaneous sequencing of the seven chains of the human AIRR reveals novel features associated with the disease and clinically relevant phenotypes, including response to therapy. These findings show the unique potential of AIRR to address precision medicine in immune-related diseases.
Background Recent advances in imaging-based spatially resolved transcriptomics (im-SRT) technologies now enable high-throughput profiling of targeted genes and their locations in fixed tissues. Normalization of gene expression data is often needed to account for technical factors that may confound underlying biological signals.Results Here, we investigate the potential impact of different gene count normalization methods with different targeted gene panels in the analysis and interpretation of im-SRT data. Using different simulated gene panels that overrepresent genes expressed in specific tissue regions or cell types, we demonstrate how normalization methods based on detected gene counts per cell differentially impact normalized gene expression magnitudes in a region- or cell type-specific manner. We show that these normalization-induced effects may reduce the reliability of downstream analyses including differential gene expression, gene fold change, and spatially variable gene analysis, introducing false positive and false negative results when compared to results obtained from gene panels that are more representative of the gene expression of the tissue's component cell types. These effects are not observed with normalization approaches that do not use detected gene counts for gene expression magnitude adjustment, such as with cell volume or cell area normalization.Conclusions We recommend using non-gene count-based normalization approaches when feasible and evaluating gene panel representativeness before using gene count-based normalization methods if necessary. Overall, we caution that the choice of normalization method and gene panel may impact the biological interpretation of the im-SRT data.
Missing covariate data is a common problem that has not been addressed in observational studies of gene expression. Here, we present a multiple imputation method that accommodates high dimensional gene expression data by incorporating principal component analysis of the transcriptome into the multiple imputation prediction models to avoid bias. Simulation studies using three datasets show that this method outperforms complete case and single imputation analyses at uncovering true positive differentially expressed genes, limiting false discovery rates, and minimizing bias. This method is easily implemented via an R Bioconductor package, RNAseqCovarImpute that integrates with the limma-voom pipeline for differential expression analysis.
Epistasis refers to changes in the effect on phenotype of a unit of genetic information, such as a single nucleotide polymorphism or a gene, dependent on the context of other genetic units. Such interactions are both biologically plausible and good candidates to explain observations which are not fully explained by an additive heritability model. However, the search for epistasis has so far largely failed to recover this missing heritability. We identify key challenges and propose that future works need to leverage idealized systems, known biology and even previously identified epistatic interactions, in order to guide the search for new interactions.
Single-cell CRISPR screens (perturb-seq) link genetic perturbations to phenotypic changes in individual cells. The most fundamental task in perturb-seq analysis is to test for association between a perturbation and a count outcome, such as gene expression. We conduct the first-ever comprehensive benchmarking study of association testing methods for low multiplicity-of-infection (MOI) perturb-seq data, finding that existing methods produce excess false positives. We conduct an extensive empirical investigation of the data, identifying three core analysis challenges: sparsity, confounding, and model misspecification. Finally, we develop an association testing method - SCEPTRE low-MOI - that resolves these analysis challenges and demonstrates improved calibration and power.
In biomedical research, validating a scientific discovery hinges on the reproducibility of its experimental results. However, in genomics, the definition and implementation of reproducibility remain imprecise. We argue that genomic reproducibility, defined as the ability of bioinformatics tools to maintain consistent results across technical replicates, is essential for advancing scientific knowledge and medical applications. Initially, we examine different interpretations of reproducibility in genomics to clarify terms. Subsequently, we discuss the impact of bioinformatics tools on genomic reproducibility and explore methods for evaluating these tools regarding their effectiveness in ensuring genomic reproducibility. Finally, we recommend best practices to improve genomic reproducibility.
Cell types are traditionally thought to be specified and stabilized by gene regulatory networks. Here, we explore how chromatin memory contributes to the specification and stabilization of cell states. Through pervasive, local, feedback loops, chromatin memory enables cell states that were initially unstable to become stable. Deeper appreciation of this self-stabilizing role for chromatin broadens our perspective of Waddington's epigenetic landscape from a static surface with islands of stability shaped by evolution, to a plasticine surface molded by experience. With implications for the evolution of cell types, stabilization of resistant states in cancer, and the widespread plasticity of complex life.
BackgroundDairy cattle breeds are populations of limited effective size, subject to recurrent outbreaks of recessive defects that are commonly studied using positional cloning. However, this strategy, based on the observation of animals with characteristic features, may overlook a number of conditions, such as immune or metabolic genetic disorders, which may be confused with pathologies of environmental etiology.ResultsWe present a data mining framework specifically designed to detect recessive defects in livestock that have been previously missed due to a lack of specific signs, incomplete penetrance, or incomplete linkage disequilibrium. This approach leverages the massive data generated by genomic selection. Its basic principle is to compare the observed and expected numbers of homozygotes for sliding haplotypes in animals with different life histories. Within three cattle breeds, we report 33 new loci responsible for increased risk of juvenile mortality and present a series of validations based on large-scale genotyping, clinical examination, and functional studies for candidate variants affecting the NOA1, RFC5, and ITGB7 genes. In particular, we describe disorders associated with NOA1 and RFC5 mutations for the first time in vertebrates.ConclusionsThe discovery of these many new defects will help to characterize the genetic basis of inbreeding depression, while their management will improve animal welfare and reduce losses to the industry.
BackgroundGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed a multitude of candidate genetic variants affecting the risk of developing complex traits and diseases. However, the highlighted regions are typically in the non-coding genome, and uncovering the functional causative single nucleotide variants (SNVs) is challenging. Prioritization of variants is commonly based on genomic annotation with markers of active regulatory elements, but current approaches still poorly predict functional variants. To address this, we systematically analyze six markers of active regulatory elements for their ability to identify functional variants.ResultsWe benchmark against molecular quantitative trait loci (molQTL) from assays of regulatory element activity that identify allelic effects on DNA-binding factor occupancy, reporter assay expression, and chromatin accessibility. We identify the combination of DNase footprints and divergent enhancer RNA (eRNA) as markers for functional variants. This signature provides high precision, but with a trade-off of low recall, thus substantially reducing candidate variant sets to prioritize variants for functional validation. We present this as a framework called FINDER-Functional SNV IdeNtification using DNase footprints and eRNA.ConclusionsWe demonstrate the utility to prioritize variants using leukocyte count trait and analyze variants in linkage disequilibrium with a lead variant to predict a functional variant in asthma. Our findings have implications for prioritizing variants from GWAS, in development of predictive scoring algorithms, and for functionally informed fine mapping approaches.
Background Genomic regions that remain poorly understood, often referred to as the dark genome, contain a variety of functionally relevant and biologically informative features. These include endogenous viral elements (EVEs)-virus-derived sequences that can dramatically impact host biology and serve as a virus fossil record. In this study, we introduce a database-integrated genome screening (DIGS) approach to investigate the dark genome in silico, focusing on EVEs found within vertebrate genomes.Results Using DIGS on 874 vertebrate genomes, we uncover approximately 1.1 million EVE sequences, with over 99% originating from endogenous retroviruses or transposable elements that contain EVE DNA. We show that the remaining 6038 sequences represent over a thousand distinct horizontal gene transfer events across 10 virus families, including some that have not previously been reported as EVEs. We explore the genomic and phylogenetic characteristics of non-retroviral EVEs and determine their rates of acquisition during vertebrate evolution. Our study uncovers novel virus diversity, broadens knowledge of virus distribution among vertebrate hosts, and provides new insights into the ecology and evolution of vertebrate viruses.Conclusions We comprehensively catalog and analyze EVEs within 874 vertebrate genomes, shedding light on the distribution, diversity, and long-term evolution of viruses and reveal their extensive impact on vertebrate genome evolution. Our results demonstrate the power of linking a relational database management system to a similarity search-based screening pipeline for in silico exploration of the dark genome.
BackgroundPubertal growth patterns correlate with future health outcomes. However, the genetic mechanisms mediating growth trajectories remain largely unknown. Here, we modeled longitudinal height growth with Super-Imposition by Translation And Rotation (SITAR) growth curve analysis on56,000 trans-ancestry samples with repeated height measurements from age 5 years to adulthood. We performed genetic analysis on six phenotypes representing the magnitude, timing, and intensity of the pubertal growth spurt. To investigate the lifelong impact of genetic variants associated with pubertal growth trajectories, we performed genetic correlation analyses and phenome-wide association studies in the Penn Medicine BioBank and the UK Biobank.ResultsLarge-scale growth modeling enables an unprecedented view of adolescent growth across contemporary and 20th-century pediatric cohorts. We identify 26 genome-wide significant loci and leverage trans-ancestry data to perform fine-mapping. Our data reveals genetic relationships between pediatric height growth and health across the life course, with different growth trajectories correlated with different outcomes. For instance, a faster tempo of pubertal growth correlates with higher bone mineral density, HOMA-IR, fasting insulin, type 2 diabetes, and lung cancer, whereas being taller at early puberty, taller across puberty, and having quicker pubertal growth were associated with higher risk for atrial fibrillation.ConclusionWe report novel genetic associations with the tempo of pubertal growth and find that genetic determinants of growth are correlated with reproductive, glycemic, respiratory, and cardiac traits in adulthood. These results aid in identifying specific growth trajectories impacting lifelong health and show that there may not be a single "optimal" pubertal growth pattern.
Background Lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) is an economically important vegetable crop worldwide. Lettuce is believed to be domesticated from a single wild ancestor Lactuca serriola and subsequently diverged into two major morphologically distinct vegetable types: leafy lettuce and stem lettuce. However, the role of epigenetic variation in lettuce domestication and divergence remains largely unknown.Results To understand the genetic and epigenetic basis underlying lettuce domestication and divergence, we generate single-base resolution DNA methylomes from 52 Lactuca accessions, including major lettuce cultivars and wild relatives. We find a significant increase of DNA methylation during lettuce domestication and uncover abundant epigenetic variations associated with lettuce domestication and divergence. Interestingly, DNA methylation variations specifically associated with leafy and stem lettuce are related to regulation and metabolic processes, respectively, while those associated with both types are enriched in stress responses. Moreover, we reveal that domestication-induced DNA methylation changes could influence expression levels of nearby and distal genes possibly through affecting chromatin accessibility and chromatin loop.Conclusion Our study provides population epigenomic insights into crop domestication and divergence and valuable resources for further domestication for diversity and epigenetic breeding to boost crop improvement.
BackgroundCentromeres depend on chromatin containing the conserved histone H3 variant CENP-A for function and inheritance, while the role of centromeric DNA repeats remains unclear. Retroelements are prevalent at centromeres across taxa and represent a potential mechanism for promoting transcription to aid in CENP-A incorporation or for generating RNA transcripts to maintain centromere integrity.ResultsIn this study, we probe into the transcription and RNA localization of the centromere-enriched retroelement G2/Jockey-3 (hereafter referred to as Jockey-3) in Drosophila melanogaster, currently the only in vivo model with assembled centromeres. We find that Jockey-3 is a major component of the centromeric transcriptome and produces RNAs that localize to centromeres in metaphase. Leveraging the polymorphism of Jockey-3 and a de novo centromere system, we show that these RNAs remain associated with their cognate DNA sequences in cis, suggesting they are unlikely to perform a sequence-specific function at all centromeres. We show that Jockey-3 transcription is positively correlated with the presence of CENP-A and that recent Jockey-3 transposition events have occurred preferentially at CENP-A-containing chromatin.ConclusionsWe propose that Jockey-3 preferentially inserts at the centromere to ensure its own selfish propagation, while contributing to transcription across these regions. Given the conservation of retroelements as centromere components through evolution, our findings may offer a basis for understanding similar associations in other species.
BackgroundIn response to drought stress (DS), plants undergo complex processes that entail significant transcriptome reprogramming. However, the intricate relationship between the dynamic alterations in the three-dimensional (3D) genome and the modulation of gene co-expression in drought responses remains a relatively unexplored area.ResultsIn this study, we reconstruct high-resolution 3D genome maps based on genomic regions marked by H3K9ac, an active histone modification that dynamically responds to soil water variations in rice. We discover a genome-wide disconnection of 3D genome contact upon DS with over 10,000 chromatin loops lost, which are partially recovered in the subsequent re-watering. Loops integrating promoter-promoter interactions (PPI) contribute to gene expression in addition to basal H3K9ac modifications. Moreover, H3K9ac-marked promoter regions with high affinities in mediating PPIs, termed as super-promoter regions (SPRs), integrate spatially clustered PPIs in a super-enhancer-like manner. Interestingly, the knockout mutation of OsbZIP23, a well-defined DS-responsive transcription factor, leads to the disassociation of over 80% DS-specific PPIs and decreased expression of the corresponding genes under DS. As a case study, we show how OsbZIP23 integrates the PPI cluster formation and the co-expression of four dehydrin genes, RAB16A-D, through targeting the RAB16C SPR in a stress signaling-dependent manner.ConclusionsOur high-resolution 3D genome maps unveil the principles and details of dynamic genome folding in response to water supply variations and illustrate OsbZIP23 as an indispensable integrator of the yet unique 3D genome organization that is essential for gene co-expression under DS in rice.
Background Neuroblastoma is a common pediatric cancer, where preclinical studies suggest that a mesenchymal-like gene expression program contributes to chemotherapy resistance. However, clinical outcomes remain poor, implying we need a better understanding of the relationship between patient tumor heterogeneity and preclinical models.Results Here, we generate single-cell RNA-seq maps of neuroblastoma cell lines, patient-derived xenograft models (PDX), and a genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM). We develop an unsupervised machine learning approach ("automatic consensus nonnegative matrix factorization" (acNMF)) to compare the gene expression programs found in preclinical models to a large cohort of patient tumors. We confirm a weakly expressed, mesenchymal-like program in otherwise adrenergic cancer cells in some pre-treated high-risk patient tumors, but this appears distinct from the presumptive drug-resistance mesenchymal programs evident in cell lines. Surprisingly, however, this weak-mesenchymal-like program is maintained in PDX and could be chemotherapy-induced in our GEMM after only 24 h, suggesting an uncharacterized therapy-escape mechanism.Conclusions Collectively, our findings improve the understanding of how neuroblastoma patient tumor heterogeneity is reflected in preclinical models, provides a comprehensive integrated resource, and a generalizable set of computational methodologies for the joint analysis of clinical and pre-clinical single-cell RNA-seq datasets.
BackgroundThe identification of genes that vary across spatial domains in tissues and cells is an essential step for spatial transcriptomics data analysis. Given the critical role it serves for downstream data interpretations, various methods for detecting spatially variable genes (SVGs) have been proposed. However, the lack of benchmarking complicates the selection of a suitable method.ResultsHere we systematically evaluate a panel of popular SVG detection methods on a large collection of spatial transcriptomics datasets, covering various tissue types, biotechnologies, and spatial resolutions. We address questions including whether different methods select a similar set of SVGs, how reliable is the reported statistical significance from each method, how accurate and robust is each method in terms of SVG detection, and how well the selected SVGs perform in downstream applications such as clustering of spatial domains. Besides these, practical considerations such as computational time and memory usage are also crucial for deciding which method to use.ConclusionsOur study evaluates the performance of each method from multiple aspects and highlights the discrepancy among different methods when calling statistically significant SVGs across diverse datasets. Overall, our work provides useful considerations for choosing methods for identifying SVGs and serves as a key reference for the future development of related methods.
BackgroundCentromeres are critical for maintaining genomic stability in eukaryotes, and their turnover shapes genome architectures and drives karyotype evolution. However, the co-evolution of centromeres from different species in allopolyploids over millions of years remains largely unknown.ResultsHere, we generate three near-complete genome assemblies, a tetraploid Brachypodium hybridum and its two diploid ancestors, Brachypodium distachyon and Brachypodium stacei. We detect high degrees of sequence, structural, and epigenetic variations of centromeres at base-pair resolution between closely related Brachypodium genomes, indicating the appearance and accumulation of species-specific centromere repeats from a common origin during evolution. We also find that centromere homogenization is accompanied by local satellite repeats bursting and retrotransposon purging, and the frequency of retrotransposon invasions drives the degree of interspecies centromere diversification. We further investigate the dynamics of centromeres during alloploidization process, and find that dramatic genetics and epigenetics architecture variations are associated with the turnover of centromeres between homologous chromosomal pairs from diploid to tetraploid. Additionally, our pangenomes analysis reveals the ongoing variations of satellite repeats and stable evolutionary homeostasis within centromeres among individuals of each Brachypodium genome with different polyploidy levels.ConclusionsOur results provide unprecedented information on the genomic, epigenomic, and functional diversity of highly repetitive DNA between closely related species and their allopolyploid genomes at both coarse and fine scale.
Spatial epigenomic technologies enable simultaneous capture of spatial location and chromatin accessibility of cells within tissue slices. Identifying peaks that display spatial variation and cellular heterogeneity is the key analytic task for characterizing the spatial chromatin accessibility landscape of complex tissues. Here, we propose an efficient and iterative model, Descart, for spatially variable peaks identification based on the graph of inter-cellular correlations. Through the comprehensive benchmarking, we demonstrate the superiority of Descart in revealing cellular heterogeneity and capturing tissue structure. Utilizing the graph of inter-cellular correlations, Descart shows its potential to denoise data, identify peak modules, and detect gene-peak interactions.
BackgroundTumors are able to acquire new capabilities, including traits such as drug resistance and metastasis that are associated with unfavorable clinical outcomes. Single-cell technologies have made it possible to study both mutational and transcriptomic profiles, but as most studies have been conducted on model systems, little is known about cancer evolution in human patients. Hence, a better understanding of cancer evolution could have important implications for treatment strategies.ResultsHere, we analyze cancer evolution and clonal selection by jointly considering mutational and transcriptomic profiles of single cells acquired from tumor biopsies from 49 lung cancer samples and 51 samples with chronic myeloid leukemia. Comparing the two profiles, we find that each clone is associated with a preferred transcriptional state. For metastasis and drug resistance, we find that the number of mutations affecting related genes increases as the clone evolves, while changes in gene expression profiles are limited. Surprisingly, we find that mutations affecting ligand-receptor interactions with the tumor microenvironment frequently emerge as clones acquire drug resistance.ConclusionsOur results show that lung cancer and chronic myeloid leukemia maintain a high clonal and transcriptional diversity, and we find little evidence in favor of clonal sweeps. This suggests that for these cancers selection based solely on growth rate is unlikely to be the dominating driving force during cancer evolution.
BackgroundThe Pharyngeal Endoderm (PE) is an extremely relevant developmental tissue, serving as the progenitor for the esophagus, parathyroids, thyroids, lungs, and thymus. While several studies have highlighted the importance of PE cells, a detailed transcriptional and epigenetic characterization of this important developmental stage is still missing, especially in humans, due to technical and ethical constraints pertaining to its early formation.ResultsHere we fill this knowledge gap by developing an in vitro protocol for the derivation of PE-like cells from human Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs) and by providing an integrated multi-omics characterization. Our PE-like cells robustly express PE markers and are transcriptionally homogenous and similar to in vivo mouse PE cells. In addition, we define their epigenetic landscape and dynamic changes in response to Retinoic Acid by combining ATAC-Seq and ChIP-Seq of histone modifications. The integration of multiple high-throughput datasets leads to the identification of new putative regulatory regions and to the inference of a Retinoic Acid-centered transcription factor network orchestrating the development of PE-like cells.ConclusionsBy combining hESCs differentiation with computational genomics, our work reveals the epigenetic dynamics that occur during human PE differentiation, providing a solid resource and foundation for research focused on the development of PE derivatives and the modeling of their developmental defects in genetic syndromes.
CRISPR screens with single-cell transcriptomic readouts are a valuable tool to understand the effect of genetic perturbations including single nucleotide variants (SNVs) associated with diseases. Interpretation of these data is currently limited as genotypes cannot be accurately inferred from guide RNA identity alone. scSNV-seq overcomes this limitation by coupling single-cell genotyping and transcriptomics of the same cells enabling accurate and high-throughput screening of SNVs. Analysis of variants across the JAK1 gene with scSNV-seq demonstrates the importance of determining the precise genetic perturbation and accurately classifies clinically observed missense variants into three functional categories: benign, loss of function, and separation of function.
Background Vision depends on the interplay between photoreceptor cells of the neural retina and the underlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Most genes involved in inherited retinal diseases display specific spatiotemporal expression within these interconnected retinal components through the local recruitment of cis-regulatory elements (CREs) in 3D nuclear space. Results To understand the role of differential chromatin architecture in establishing tissue-specific expression at inherited retinal disease loci, we mapped genome-wide chromatin interactions using in situ Hi-C and H3K4me3 HiChIP on neural retina and RPE/choroid from human adult donor eyes. We observed chromatin looping between active promoters and 32,425 and 8060 candidate CREs in the neural retina and RPE/choroid, respectively. A comparative 3D genome analysis between these two retinal tissues revealed that 56% of 290 known inherited retinal disease genes were marked by differential chromatin interactions. One of these was ABCA4, which is implicated in the most common autosomal recessive inherited retinal disease. We zoomed in on retina- and RPE-specific cis-regulatory interactions at the ABCA4 locus using high-resolution UMI-4C. Integration with bulk and single-cell epigenomic datasets and in vivo enhancer assays in zebrafish revealed tissue-specific CREs interacting with ABCA4. Conclusions Through comparative 3D genome mapping, based on genome-wide, promoter-centric, and locus-specific assays of human neural retina and RPE, we have shown that gene regulation at key inherited retinal disease loci is likely mediated by tissue-specific chromatin interactions. These findings do not only provide insight into tissue-specific regulatory landscapes at retinal disease loci, but also delineate the search space for non-coding genomic variation underlying unsolved inherited retinal diseases.
The accurate reconstruction of genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) for unculturable species poses challenges due to the incomplete and fragmented genetic information typical of metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs). While existing tools leverage sequence homology from single genomes, this study introduces pan-Draft, a pan-reactome-based approach exploiting recurrent genetic evidence to determine the solid core structure of species-level GEMs. By comparing MAGs clustered at the species-level, pan-Draft addresses the issues due to the incompleteness and contamination of individual genomes, providing high-quality draft models and an accessory reactions catalog supporting the gapfilling step. This approach will improve our comprehension of metabolic functions of uncultured species.
BackgroundDNA damage tolerance (DDT) enables replication to continue in the presence of fork stalling lesions. In mammalian cells, DDT is regulated by two independent pathways, controlled by the polymerase REV1 and ubiquitinated PCNA, respectively.ResultsTo determine the molecular and genomic impact of a global DDT defect, we studied PcnaK164R/-;Rev1-/- compound mutants in mouse cells. Double-mutant cells display increased replication stress, hypersensitivity to genotoxic agents, replication speed, and repriming. A whole-genome CRISPR-Cas9 screen revealed a strict reliance of double-mutant cells on the CST complex, where CST promotes fork stability. Whole-genome sequencing indicated that this double-mutant DDT defect favors the generation of large, replication-stress inducible deletions of 0.4-4.0 kbp, defined as type 3 deletions. Junction break sites of these deletions reveal microhomology preferences of 1-2 base pairs, differing from the smaller type 1 and type 2 deletions. These differential characteristics suggest the existence of molecularly distinct deletion pathways. Type 3 deletions are abundant in human tumors, can dominate the deletion landscape, and are associated with DNA damage response status and treatment modality.ConclusionsOur data highlight the essential contribution of the DDT system to genome maintenance and type 3 deletions as mutational signature of replication stress. The unique characteristics of type 3 deletions implicate the existence of a novel deletion pathway in mice and humans that is counteracted by DDT.
BackgroundIncreasing evidence suggests that a substantial proportion of disease-associated mutations occur in enhancers, regions of non-coding DNA essential to gene regulation. Understanding the structures and mechanisms of the regulatory programs this variation affects can shed light on the apparatuses of human diseases.ResultsWe collect epigenetic and gene expression datasets from seven early time points during neural differentiation. Focusing on this model system, we construct networks of enhancer-promoter interactions, each at an individual stage of neural induction. These networks serve as the base for a rich series of analyses, through which we demonstrate their temporal dynamics and enrichment for various disease-associated variants. We apply the Girvan-Newman clustering algorithm to these networks to reveal biologically relevant substructures of regulation. Additionally, we demonstrate methods to validate predicted enhancer-promoter interactions using transcription factor overexpression and massively parallel reporter assays.ConclusionsOur findings suggest a generalizable framework for exploring gene regulatory programs and their dynamics across developmental processes; this includes a comprehensive approach to studying the effects of disease-associated variation on transcriptional networks. The techniques applied to our networks have been published alongside our findings as a computational tool, E-P-INAnalyzer. Our procedure can be utilized across different cellular contexts and disorders.
BackgroundVariable number tandem repeats (VNTRs) are highly polymorphic DNA regions harboring many potentially disease-causing variants. However, VNTRs often appear unresolved ("dark") in variation databases due to their repetitive nature. One particularly complex and medically relevant VNTR is the KIV-2 VNTR located in the cardiovascular disease gene LPA which encompasses up to 70% of the coding sequence. ResultsUsing the highly complex LPA gene as a model, we develop a computational approach to resolve intra-repeat variation in VNTRs from largely available short-read sequencing data. We apply the approach to six protein-coding VNTRs in 2504 samples from the 1000 Genomes Project and developed an optimized method for the LPA KIV-2 VNTR that discriminates the confounding KIV-2 subtypes upfront. This results in an F1-score improvement of up to 2.1-fold compared to previously published strategies. Finally, we analyze the LPA VNTR in > 199,000 UK Biobank samples, detecting > 700 KIV-2 mutations. This approach successfully reveals new strong Lp(a)-lowering effects for KIV-2 variants, with protective effect against coronary artery disease, and also validated previous findings based on tagging SNPs. ConclusionsOur approach paves the way for reliable variant detection in VNTRs at scale and we show that it is transferable to other dark regions, which will help unlock medical information hidden in VNTRs.
Identifying viruses from metagenomes is a common step to explore the virus composition in the human gut. Here, we introduce VirRep, a hybrid language representation learning framework, for identifying viruses from human gut metagenomes. VirRep combines a context-aware encoder and an evolution-aware encoder to improve sequence representation by incorporating k-mer patterns and sequence homologies. Benchmarking on both simulated and real datasets with varying viral proportions demonstrates that VirRep outperforms state-of-the-art methods. When applied to fecal metagenomes from a colorectal cancer cohort, VirRep identifies 39 high-quality viral species associated with the disease, many of which cannot be detected by existing methods.
Background Although the human bladder is reported to harbor unique microbiota, our understanding of how these microbial communities interact with their human hosts is limited, mostly owing to the lack of isolates to test mechanistic hypotheses. Niche-specific bacterial collections and associated reference genome databases have been instrumental in expanding knowledge of the microbiota of other anatomical sites, such as the gut and oral cavity.Results To facilitate genomic, functional, and experimental analyses of the human bladder microbiota, we present a bladder-specific bacterial isolate reference collection comprising 1134 genomes, primarily from adult females. These genomes were culled from bacterial isolates obtained by a metaculturomic method from bladder urine collected by transurethral catheterization. This bladder-specific bacterial isolate reference collection includes 196 different species, including representatives of major aerobes and facultative anaerobes, as well as some anaerobes. It captures 72.2% of the genera found when re-examining previously published 16S rRNA gene sequencing of 392 adult female bladder urine samples. Comparative genomic analysis finds that the taxonomies and functions of the bladder microbiota share more similarities with the vaginal microbiota than the gut microbiota. Whole-genome phylogenetic and functional analyses of 186 bladder Escherichia coli isolates and 387 gut Escherichia coli isolates support the hypothesis that phylogroup distribution and functions of Escherichia coli strains differ dramatically between these two very different niches.Conclusions This bladder-specific bacterial isolate reference collection is a unique resource that will enable bladder microbiota research and comparison to isolates from other anatomical sites.
Background Splicing factors are vital for the regulation of RNA splicing, but some have also been implicated in regulating transcription. The underlying molecular mechanisms of their involvement in transcriptional processes remain poorly understood. Results Here, we describe a direct role of splicing factor RBM22 in coordinating multiple steps of RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) transcription in human cells. The RBM22 protein widely occupies the RNAPII-transcribed gene locus in the nucleus. Loss of RBM22 promotes RNAPII pause release, reduces elongation velocity, and provokes transcriptional readthrough genome-wide, coupled with production of transcripts containing sequences from downstream of the gene. RBM22 preferentially binds to the hyperphosphorylated, transcriptionally engaged RNAPII and coordinates its dynamics by regulating the homeostasis of the 7SK-P-TEFb complex and the association between RNAPII and SPT5 at the chromatin level. Conclusions Our results uncover the multifaceted role of RBM22 in orchestrating the transcriptional program of RNAPII and provide evidence implicating a splicing factor in both RNAPII elongation kinetics and termination control.
Background Although sequencing technologies have boosted the measurement of the genomic diversity of plant crops, it remains challenging to accurately genotype millions of genetic variants, especially structural variations, with only short reads. In recent years, many graph-based variation genotyping methods have been developed to address this issue and tested for human genomes. However, their performance in plant genomes remains largely elusive. Furthermore, pipelines integrating the advantages of current genotyping methods might be required, considering the different complexity of plant genomes.Results Here we comprehensively evaluate eight such genotypers in different scenarios in terms of variant type and size, sequencing parameters, genomic context, and complexity, as well as graph size, using both simulated and real data sets from representative plant genomes. Our evaluation reveals that there are still great challenges to applying existing methods to plants, such as excessive repeats and variants or high resource consumption. Therefore, we propose a pipeline called Ensemble Variant Genotyper (EVG) that can achieve better genotyping performance in almost all experimental scenarios and comparably higher genotyping recall and precision even using 5x reads. Furthermore, we demonstrate that EVG is more robust with an increasing number of graphed genomes, especially for insertions and deletions.Conclusions Our study will provide new insights into the development and application of graph-based genotyping algorithms. We conclude that EVG provides an accurate, unbiased, and cost-effective way for genotyping both small and large variations and will be potentially used in population-scale genotyping for large, repetitive, and heterozygous plant genomes.
Background: The removal of introns occurs through the splicing of a 5 ' splice site (5 ' ss) with a 3 ' splice site (3 ' ss). These two elements are recognized by distinct components of the spliceosome. However, introns in higher eukaryotes contain many matches to the 5 ' and 3 ' splice-site motifs that are presumed not to be used. Results: Here, we find that many of these sites can be used. We also find occurrences of the AGGT motif that can function as either a 5 ' ss or a 3 ' ss-previously referred to as dual-specific splice sites (DSSs)-within introns. Analysis of the Sequence Read Archive reveals a 3.1-fold enrichment of DSSs relative to expectation, implying synergy between the ability to function as a 5 ' ss and 3 ' ss. Despite this suggested mechanistic advantage, DSSs are 2.7- and 4.7-fold underrepresented in annotated 5 ' and 3 ' splice sites. A curious exception is the polyubiquitin gene UBC, which contains a tandem array of DSSs that precisely delimit the boundary of each ubiquitin monomer. The resulting isoforms splice stochastically to include a variable number of ubiquitin monomers. We found no evidence of tissue-specific or feedback regulation but note the 8.4-fold enrichment of DSS-spliced introns in tandem repeat genes suggests a driving role in the evolution of genes like UBC. Conclusions: We find an excess of unannotated splice sites and the utilization of DSSs in tandem repeats supports the role of splicing in gene evolution. These findings enhance our understanding of the diverse and complex nature of the splicing process.
In this work, we extend vcfdist to be the first variant call benchmarking tool to jointly evaluate phased single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), small insertions/deletions (INDELs), and structural variants (SVs) for the whole genome. First, we find that a joint evaluation of small and structural variants uniformly reduces measured errors for SNPs (- 28.9%), INDELs (- 19.3%), and SVs (- 52.4%) across three datasets. vcfdist also corrects a common flaw in phasing evaluations, reducing measured flip errors by over 50%. Lastly, we show that vcfdist is more accurate than previously published works and on par with the newest approaches while providing improved result interpretability.
Background Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) have led to groundbreaking advancements in life sciences. To develop bioinformatics tools for scRNA-seq and SRT data and perform unbiased benchmarks, data simulation has been widely adopted by providing explicit ground truth and generating customized datasets. However, the performance of simulation methods under multiple scenarios has not been comprehensively assessed, making it challenging to choose suitable methods without practical guidelines.Results We systematically evaluated 49 simulation methods developed for scRNA-seq and/or SRT data in terms of accuracy, functionality, scalability, and usability using 152 reference datasets derived from 24 platforms. SRTsim, scDesign3, ZINB-WaVE, and scDesign2 have the best accuracy performance across various platforms. Unexpectedly, some methods tailored to scRNA-seq data have potential compatibility for simulating SRT data. Lun, SPARSim, and scDesign3-tree outperform other methods under corresponding simulation scenarios. Phenopath, Lun, Simple, and MFA yield high scalability scores but they cannot generate realistic simulated data. Users should consider the trade-offs between method accuracy and scalability (or functionality) when making decisions. Additionally, execution errors are mainly caused by failed parameter estimations and appearance of missing or infinite values in calculations. We provide practical guidelines for method selection, a standard pipeline Simpipe (https://github.com/duohongrui/simpipe; https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11178409), and an online tool Simsite (https://www.ciblab.net/software/simshiny/) for data simulation.Conclusions No method performs best on all criteria, thus a good-yet-not-the-best method is recommended if it solves problems effectively and reasonably. Our comprehensive work provides crucial insights for developers on modeling gene expression data and fosters the simulation process for users.
BackgroundVascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is one of the most powerful proangiogenic factors and plays an important role in multiple diseases. Increased glycolytic rates and lactate accumulation are associated with pathological angiogenesis.ResultsHere, we show that a feedback loop between H3K9 lactylation (H3K9la) and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in endothelial cells drives VEGF-induced angiogenesis. We find that the H3K9la levels are upregulated in endothelial cells in response to VEGF stimulation. Pharmacological inhibition of glycolysis decreases H3K9 lactylation and attenuates neovascularization. CUT& Tag analysis reveals that H3K9la is enriched at the promoters of a set of angiogenic genes and promotes their transcription. Interestingly, we find that hyperlactylation of H3K9 inhibits expression of the lactylation eraser HDAC2, whereas overexpression of HDAC2 decreases H3K9 lactylation and suppresses angiogenesis.ConclusionsCollectively, our study illustrates that H3K9la is important for VEGF-induced angiogenesis, and interruption of the H3K9la/HDAC2 feedback loop may represent a novel therapeutic method for treating pathological neovascularization.
Background The advent of single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) has driven significant computational methods development for all steps in the scRNA-seq data analysis pipeline, including filtering, normalization, and clustering. The large number of methods and their resulting parameter combinations has created a combinatorial set of possible pipelines to analyze scRNA-seq data, which leads to the obvious question: which is best? Several benchmarking studies compare methods but frequently find variable performance depending on dataset and pipeline characteristics. Alternatively, the large number of scRNA-seq datasets along with advances in supervised machine learning raise a tantalizing possibility: could the optimal pipeline be predicted for a given dataset?Results Here, we begin to answer this question by applying 288 scRNA-seq analysis pipelines to 86 datasets and quantifying pipeline success via a range of measures evaluating cluster purity and biological plausibility. We build supervised machine learning models to predict pipeline success given a range of dataset and pipeline characteristics. We find that prediction performance is significantly better than random and that in many cases pipelines predicted to perform well provide clustering outputs similar to expert-annotated cell type labels. We identify characteristics of datasets that correlate with strong prediction performance that could guide when such prediction models may be useful.Conclusions Supervised machine learning models have utility for recommending analysis pipelines and therefore the potential to alleviate the burden of choosing from the near-infinite number of possibilities. Different aspects of datasets influence the predictive performance of such models which will further guide users.
Expansions of tandem repeats (TRs) cause approximately 60 monogenic diseases. We expect that the discovery of additional pathogenic repeat expansions will narrow the diagnostic gap in many diseases. A growing number of TR expansions are being identified, and interpreting them is a challenge. We present RExPRT (Repeat EXpansion Pathogenicity pRediction Tool), a machine learning tool for distinguishing pathogenic from benign TR expansions. Our results demonstrate that an ensemble approach classifies TRs with an average precision of 93% and recall of 83%. RExPRT's high precision will be valuable in large-scale discovery studies, which require prioritization of candidate loci for follow-up studies.
Background In the metagenomic assembly of a microbial community, abundant species are often thought to assemble well given their deeper sequencing coverage. This conjuncture is rarely tested or evaluated in practice. We often do not know how many abundant species are missing and do not have an approach to recover them.Results Here, we propose k-mer based and 16S RNA based methods to measure the completeness of metagenome assembly. We show that even with PacBio high-fidelity (HiFi) reads, abundant species are often not assembled, as high strain diversity may lead to fragmented contigs. We develop a novel reference-free algorithm to recover abundant metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) by identifying circular assembly subgraphs. Complemented with a reference-free genome binning heuristics based on dimension reduction, the proposed method rescues many abundant species that would be missing with existing methods and produces competitive results compared to those state-of-the-art binners in terms of total number of near-complete genome bins.Conclusions Our work emphasizes the importance of metagenome completeness, which has often been overlooked. Our algorithm generates more circular MAGs and moves a step closer to the complete representation of microbial communities.
Methods to measure chromatin contacts at genomic regions bound by histone modifications or proteins are important tools to investigate chromatin organization. However, such methods do not capture the possible involvement of other epigenomic features such as G-quadruplex DNA secondary structures (G4s). To bridge this gap, we introduce ViCAR (viewpoint HiCAR), for the direct antibody-based capture of chromatin interactions at folded G4s. Through ViCAR, we showcase the first G4-3D interaction landscape. Using histone marks, we also demonstrate how ViCAR improves on earlier approaches yielding increased signal-to-noise. ViCAR is a practical and powerful tool to explore epigenetic marks and 3D genome interactomes.
Spatial transcriptomics has transformed our ability to study tissue complexity. However, it remains challenging to accurately dissect tissue organization at single-cell resolution. Here we introduce scHolography, a machine learning-based method designed to reconstruct single-cell spatial neighborhoods and facilitate 3D tissue visualization using spatial and single-cell RNA sequencing data. scHolography employs a high-dimensional transcriptome-to-space projection that infers spatial relationships among cells, defining spatial neighborhoods and enhancing analyses of cell-cell communication. When applied to both human and mouse datasets, scHolography enables quantitative assessments of spatial cell neighborhoods, cell-cell interactions, and tumor-immune microenvironment. Together, scHolography offers a robust computational framework for elucidating 3D tissue organization and analyzing spatial dynamics at the cellular level.
Background: Alternative polyadenylation (APA) affects most human genes and is recurrently dysregulated in all studied cancers. However, the mechanistic origins of this dysregulation are incompletely understood. Results: We describe an unbiased analysis of molecular regulators of poly(A) site selection across The Cancer Genome Atlas and identify that colorectal adenocarcinoma is an outlier relative to all other cancer subtypes. This distinction arises from the frequent presence of loss-of-function APC mutations in colorectal adenocarcinoma, which are strongly associated with long 3 ' UTR expression relative to tumors lacking APC mutations. APC knockout similarly dysregulates APA in human colon organoids. By mining previously published APC eCLIP data, we show that APC preferentially binds G- and C-rich motifs just upstream of proximal poly(A) sites. Lastly, we find that reduced APC expression is associated with APA dysregulation in tumor types lacking recurrent APC mutations. Conclusions: As APC has been previously identified as an RNA-binding protein that preferentially binds 3 ' UTRs during mouse neurogenesis, our results suggest that APC promotes proximal poly(A) site use and that APC loss and altered expression contribute to pervasive APA dysregulation in cancers.
Numerous algorithms have been proposed to identify cell types in single-cell RNA sequencing data, yet a fundamental problem remains: determining associations between cells and phenotypes such as cancer. We develop SCIPAC, the first algorithm that quantitatively estimates the association between each cell in single-cell data and a phenotype. SCIPAC also provides a p-value for each association and applies to data with virtually any type of phenotype. We demonstrate SCIPAC's accuracy in simulated data. On four real cancerous or noncancerous datasets, insights from SCIPAC help interpret the data and generate new hypotheses. SCIPAC requires minimum tuning and is computationally very fast.
Background Amino acid substitutions can perturb protein activity in multiple ways. Understanding their mechanistic basis may pinpoint how residues contribute to protein function. Here, we characterize the mechanisms underlying variant effects in human glucokinase (GCK) variants, building on our previous comprehensive study on GCK variant activity.Results Using a yeast growth-based assay, we score the abundance of 95% of GCK missense and nonsense variants. When combining the abundance scores with our previously determined activity scores, we find that 43% of hypoactive variants also decrease cellular protein abundance. The low-abundance variants are enriched in the large domain, while residues in the small domain are tolerant to mutations with respect to abundance. Instead, many variants in the small domain perturb GCK conformational dynamics which are essential for appropriate activity.Conclusions In this study, we identify residues important for GCK metabolic stability and conformational dynamics. These residues could be targeted to modulate GCK activity, and thereby affect glucose homeostasis.
Background Plant meristems are structured organs consisting of distinct layers of stem cells, which differentiate into new plant tissue. Mutations in meristematic layers can propagate into large sectors of the plant. However, the characteristics of meristematic mutations remain unclear, limiting our understanding of the genetic basis of somaclonal phenotypic variation. Results Here, we analyse the frequency and distribution of somatic mutations in an apricot tree. We separately sequence the epidermis (developing from meristem layer 1) and the flesh (developing from meristem layer 2) of several fruits sampled across the entire tree. We find that most somatic mutations (> 90%) are specific to individual layers. Interestingly, layer 1 shows a higher mutation load than layer 2, implying different mutational dynamics between the layers. The distribution of somatic mutations follows the branching of the tree. This suggests that somatic mutations are propagated to developing branches through axillary meristems. In turn, this leads us to the unexpected observation that the genomes of layer 1 of distant branches are more similar to each other than to the genomes of layer 2 of the same branches. Finally, using single-cell RNA sequencing, we demonstrate that layer-specific mutations were only transcribed in the cells of the respective layers and can form the genetic basis of somaclonal phenotypic variation. Conclusions Here, we analyse the frequency and distribution of somatic mutations with meristematic origin. Our observations on the layer specificity of somatic mutations outline how they are distributed, how they propagate, and how they can impact clonally propagated crops.
BackgroundPreeclampsia, one of the most lethal pregnancy-related diseases, is associated with the disruption of uterine spiral artery remodeling during placentation. However, the early molecular events leading to preeclampsia remain unknown.ResultsBy analyzing placentas from preeclampsia, non-preeclampsia, and twin pregnancies with selective intrauterine growth restriction, we show that the pathogenesis of preeclampsia is attributed to immature trophoblast and maldeveloped endothelial cells. Delayed epigenetic reprogramming during early extraembryonic tissue development leads to generation of excessive immature trophoblast cells. We find reduction of de novo DNA methylation in these trophoblast cells results in selective overexpression of maternally imprinted genes, including the endoretrovirus-derived gene PEG10 (paternally expressed gene 10). PEG10 forms virus-like particles, which are transferred from the trophoblast to the closely proximate endothelial cells. In normal pregnancy, only a low amount of PEG10 is transferred to maternal cells; however, in preeclampsia, excessive PEG10 disrupts maternal vascular development by inhibiting TGF-beta signaling.ConclusionsOur study reveals the intricate epigenetic mechanisms that regulate trans-generational genetic conflict and ultimately ensure proper maternal-fetal interface formation.
Background Like its parent base 5-methylcytosine (5mC), 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is a direct epigenetic modification of cytosines in the context of CpG dinucleotides. 5hmC is the most abundant oxidized form of 5mC, generated through the action of TET dioxygenases at gene bodies of actively-transcribed genes and at active or lineage-specific enhancers. Although such enrichments are reported for 5hmC, to date, predictive models of gene expression state or putative regulatory regions for genes using 5hmC have not been developed.Results Here, by using only 5hmC enrichment in genic regions and their vicinity, we develop neural network models that predict gene expression state across 49 cell types. We show that our deep neural network models distinguish high vs low expression state utilizing only 5hmC levels and these predictive models generalize to unseen cell types. Further, in order to leverage 5hmC signal in distal enhancers for expression prediction, we employ an Activity-by-Contact model and also develop a graph convolutional neural network model with both utilizing Hi-C data and 5hmC enrichment to prioritize enhancer-promoter links. These approaches identify known and novel putative enhancers for key genes in multiple immune cell subsets.Conclusions Our work highlights the importance of 5hmC in gene regulation through proximal and distal mechanisms and provides a framework to link it to genome function. With the recent advances in 6-letter DNA sequencing by short and long-read techniques, profiling of 5mC and 5hmC may be done routinely in the near future, hence, providing a broad range of applications for the methods developed here.
BackgroundCarcinogenesis is driven by interactions between genetic mutations and the local tumor microenvironment. Recent research has identified hundreds of cancer driver genes; however, these studies often include a mixture of different molecular subtypes and ecological niches and ignore the impact of the immune system.ResultsIn this study, we compare the landscape of driver genes in tumors that escaped the immune system (escape +) versus those that did not (escape -). We analyze 9896 primary tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas using the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous mutations (dN/dS) and find 85 driver genes, including 27 and 16 novel genes, in escape - and escape + tumors, respectively. The dN/dS of driver genes in immune escaped tumors is significantly lower and closer to neutrality than in non-escaped tumors, suggesting selection buffering in driver genes fueled by immune escape. Additionally, we find that immune evasion leads to more mutated sites, a diverse array of mutational signatures and is linked to tumor prognosis.ConclusionsOur findings highlight the need for improved patient stratification to identify new therapeutic targets for cancer treatment.
Transposable elements (TEs) are important drivers of genome evolution. Nonetheless, TE annotation remains a complex and challenging task. As more genomes from phylogenetically diverse species are published, a comprehensive pipeline for accurate annotation of diverse TEs is increasingly important. Recently, (Ou et al. Genome Biol. 20:275, 2019) developed a new comprehensive pipeline, Extensive De novo Transposable element Annotator (EDTA), and benchmarked its performance on the genomes of three species: maize, wheat, and fruit fly. Because TE landscapes can vary tremendously across species, we tested EDTA's performance on four additional genomes with different TE landscapes: mouse, zebrafish, zebra finch, and chicken. Our analysis reveals that EDTA faces challenges with repeat classification in these genomes and underperforms overall relative to its benchmark dataset. Notably, EDTA consistently misclassifies nonLTR retrotransposons as DNA transposons, resulting in erroneous TE annotations for species with considerable repertoires of nonLTR retrotransposons. Overall, we set expectations for EDTA's performance on genomes spanning additional diversity, urge caution when using EDTA on genomes with divergent TE repertoires from the species on which it was initially benchmarked, and hope to motivate the development of methods that are robust to both the diversity of TEs and TE landscapes observed across species.
BackgroundExtensive research has been conducted on fruit development in crops, but the metabolic regulatory networks underlying perennial fruit trees remain poorly understood. To address this knowledge gap, we conduct a comprehensive analysis of the metabolome, proteome, transcriptome, DNA methylome, and small RNAome profiles of pear fruit flesh at 11 developing stages, spanning from fruitlet to ripening. Here, we systematically investigate the metabolic landscape and regulatory network involved.ResultsWe generate an association database consisting of 439 metabolites and 14,399 genes to elucidate the gene regulatory network of pear flesh metabolism. Interestingly, we detect increased DNA methylation in the promoters of most genes within the database during pear flesh development. Application of a DNA methylation inhibitor to the developing fruit represses chlorophyll degradation in the pericarp and promotes xanthophyll, beta-carotene, and abscisic acid (ABA) accumulation in the flesh. We find the gradual increase in ABA production during pear flesh development is correlated with the expression of several carotenoid pathway genes and multiple transcription factors. Of these transcription factors, the zinc finger protein PbZFP1 is identified as a positive mediator of ABA biosynthesis in pear flesh. Most ABA pathway genes and transcription factors are modified by DNA methylation in the promoters, although some are induced by the DNA methylation inhibitor. These results suggest that DNA methylation inhibits ABA accumulation, which may delay fruit ripening.ConclusionOur findings provide insights into epigenetic regulation of metabolic regulatory networks during pear flesh development, particularly with regard to DNA methylation.
BackgroundDNA methylation in the form of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) is the most abundant base modification in animals. However, 5mC levels vary widely across taxa. While vertebrate genomes are hypermethylated, in most invertebrates, 5mC concentrates on constantly and highly transcribed genes (gene body methylation; GbM) and, in some species, on transposable elements (TEs), a pattern known as "mosaic". Yet, the role and developmental dynamics of 5mC and how these explain interspecies differences in DNA methylation patterns remain poorly understood, especially in Spiralia, a large clade of invertebrates comprising nearly half of the animal phyla.ResultsHere, we generate base-resolution methylomes for three species with distinct genomic features and phylogenetic positions in Annelida, a major spiralian phylum. All possible 5mC patterns occur in annelids, from typical invertebrate intermediate levels in a mosaic distribution to hypermethylation and methylation loss. GbM is common to annelids with 5mC, and methylation differences across species are explained by taxon-specific transcriptional dynamics or the presence of intronic TEs. Notably, the link between GbM and transcription decays during development, alongside a gradual and global, age-dependent demethylation in adult stages. Additionally, reducing 5mC levels with cytidine analogs during early development impairs normal embryogenesis and reactivates TEs in the annelid Owenia fusiformis.ConclusionsOur study indicates that global epigenetic erosion during development and aging is an ancestral feature of bilateral animals. However, the tight link between transcription and gene body methylation is likely more important in early embryonic stages, and 5mC-mediated TE silencing probably emerged convergently across animal lineages.
BackgroundThe fatal diffuse midline gliomas (DMG) are characterized by an undruggable H3K27M mutation in H3.1 or H3.3. K27M impairs normal development by stalling differentiation. The identification of targetable pathways remains very poorly explored. Toward this goal, we undertake a multi-omics approach to evaluate replication timing profiles, transcriptomics, and cell cycle features in DMG cells from both H3.1K27M and H3.3K27M subgroups and perform a comparative, integrative data analysis with healthy brain tissue.ResultsDMG cells present differential replication timing in each subgroup, which, in turn, correlates with significant differential gene expression. Differentially expressed genes in S phase are involved in various pathways related to DNA replication. We detect increased expression of DNA replication genes earlier in the cell cycle in DMG cell lines compared to normal brain cells. Furthermore, the distance between origins of replication in DMG cells is smaller than in normal brain cells and their fork speed is slower, a read-out of replication stress. Consistent with these findings, DMG tumors present high replication stress signatures in comparison to normal brain cells. Finally, DMG cells are specifically sensitive to replication stress therapy.ConclusionsThis whole genome multi-omics approach provides insights into the cell cycle regulation of DMG via the H3K27M mutations and establishes a pharmacologic vulnerability in DNA replication, which resolves a potentially novel therapeutic strategy for this non-curable disease.
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) regulate key aspects of RNA processing including alternative splicing, mRNA degradation and localization by physically binding RNA molecules. Current methods to map these interactions, such as CLIP, rely on purifying single proteins at a time. Our new method, ePRINT, maps RBP-RNA interaction networks on a global scale without purifying individual RBPs. ePRINT uses exoribonuclease XRN1 to precisely map the 5 ' end of the RBP binding site and uncovers direct and indirect targets of an RBP of interest. Importantly, ePRINT can also uncover RBPs that are differentially activated between cell fate transitions, including neural progenitor differentiation into neurons.
BackgroundTartary buckwheat, Fagopyrum tataricum, is a pseudocereal crop with worldwide distribution and high nutritional value. However, the origin and domestication history of this crop remain to be elucidated.ResultsHere, by analyzing the population genomics of 567 accessions collected worldwide and reviewing historical documents, we find that Tartary buckwheat originated in the Himalayan region and then spread southwest possibly along with the migration of the Yi people, a minority in Southwestern China that has a long history of planting Tartary buckwheat. Along with the expansion of the Mongol Empire, Tartary buckwheat dispersed to Europe and ultimately to the rest of the world. The different natural growth environments resulted in adaptation, especially significant differences in salt tolerance between northern and southern Chinese Tartary buckwheat populations. By scanning for selective sweeps and using a genome-wide association study, we identify genes responsible for Tartary buckwheat domestication and differentiation, which we then experimentally validate. Comparative genomics and QTL analysis further shed light on the genetic foundation of the easily dehulled trait in a particular variety that was artificially selected by the Wa people, a minority group in Southwestern China known for cultivating Tartary buckwheat specifically for steaming as a staple food to prevent lysine deficiency.ConclusionsThis study provides both comprehensive insights into the origin and domestication of, and a foundation for molecular breeding for, Tartary buckwheat.
Haplotype information is crucial for biomedical and population genetics research. However, current strategies to produce de novo haplotype-resolved assemblies often require either difficult-to-acquire parental data or an intermediate haplotype-collapsed assembly. Here, we present Graphasing, a workflow which synthesizes the global phase signal of Strand-seq with assembly graph topology to produce chromosome-scale de novo haplotypes for diploid genomes. Graphasing readily integrates with any assembly workflow that both outputs an assembly graph and has a haplotype assembly mode. Graphasing performs comparably to trio phasing in contiguity, phasing accuracy, and assembly quality, outperforms Hi-C in phasing accuracy, and generates human assemblies with over 18 chromosome-spanning haplotypes.
Background Individual cells from isogenic populations often display large cell-to-cell differences in gene expression. This "noise" in expression derives from several sources, including the genomic and cellular environment in which a gene resides. Large-scale maps of genomic environments have revealed the effects of epigenetic modifications and transcription factor occupancy on mean expression levels, but leveraging such maps to explain expression noise will require new methods to assay how expression noise changes at locations across the genome.Results To address this gap, we present Single-cell Analysis of Reporter Gene Expression Noise and Transcriptome (SARGENT), a method that simultaneously measures the noisiness of reporter genes integrated throughout the genome and the global mRNA profiles of individual reporter-gene-containing cells. Using SARGENT, we perform the first comprehensive genome-wide survey of how genomic locations impact gene expression noise. We find that the mean and noise of expression correlate with different histone modifications. We quantify the intrinsic and extrinsic components of reporter gene noise and, using the associated mRNA profiles, assign the extrinsic component to differences between the CD24+ "stem-like" substate and the more "differentiated" substate. SARGENT also reveals the effects of transgene integrations on endogenous gene expression, which will help guide the search for "safe-harbor" loci.Conclusions Taken together, we show that SARGENT is a powerful tool to measure both the mean and noise of gene expression at locations across the genome and that the data generatd by SARGENT reveals important insights into the regulation of gene expression noise genome-wide.
Background Gene regulatory network (GRN) models that are formulated as ordinary differential equations (ODEs) can accurately explain temporal gene expression patterns and promise to yield new insights into important cellular processes, disease progression, and intervention design. Learning such gene regulatory ODEs is challenging, since we want to predict the evolution of gene expression in a way that accurately encodes the underlying GRN governing the dynamics and the nonlinear functional relationships between genes. Most widely used ODE estimation methods either impose too many parametric restrictions or are not guided by meaningful biological insights, both of which impede either scalability, explainability, or both.Results We developed PHOENIX, a modeling framework based on neural ordinary differential equations (NeuralODEs) and Hill-Langmuir kinetics, that overcomes limitations of other methods by flexibly incorporating prior domain knowledge and biological constraints to promote sparse, biologically interpretable representations of GRN ODEs. We tested the accuracy of PHOENIX in a series of in silico experiments, benchmarking it against several currently used tools. We demonstrated PHOENIX's flexibility by modeling regulation of oscillating expression profiles obtained from synchronized yeast cells. We also assessed the scalability of PHOENIX by modeling genome-scale GRNs for breast cancer samples ordered in pseudotime and for B cells treated with Rituximab.Conclusions PHOENIX uses a combination of user-defined prior knowledge and functional forms from systems biology to encode biological "first principles" as soft constraints on the GRN allowing us to predict subsequent gene expression patterns in a biologically explainable manner.
BackgroundThe androgen receptor (AR) is a tumor suppressor in estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer, a role sustained in some ER negative breast cancers. Key factors dictating AR genomic activity in a breast context are largely unknown. Herein, we employ an unbiased chromatin immunoprecipitation-based proteomic technique to identify endogenous AR interacting co-regulatory proteins in ER positive and negative models of breast cancer to gain new insight into mechanisms of AR signaling in this disease.ResultsThe DNA-binding factor GATA3 is identified and validated as a novel AR interacting protein in breast cancer cells irrespective of ER status. AR activation by the natural ligand 5 alpha-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) increases nuclear AR-GATA3 interactions, resulting in AR-dependent enrichment of GATA3 chromatin binding at a sub-set of genomic loci. Silencing GATA3 reduces but does not prevent AR DNA binding and transactivation of genes associated with AR/GATA3 co-occupied loci, indicating a co-regulatory role for GATA3 in AR signaling. DHT-induced AR/GATA3 binding coincides with upregulation of luminal differentiation genes, including EHF and KDM4B, established master regulators of a breast epithelial cell lineage. These findings are validated in a patient-derived xenograft model of breast cancer. Interaction between AR and GATA3 is also associated with AR-mediated growth inhibition in ER positive and ER negative breast cancer.ConclusionsAR and GATA3 interact to transcriptionally regulate luminal epithelial cell differentiation in breast cancer regardless of ER status. This interaction facilitates the tumor suppressor function of AR and mechanistically explains why AR expression is associated with less proliferative, more differentiated breast tumors and better overall survival in breast cancer.
Background Small RNAs are essential for germ cell development and fertilization. However, fundamental questions remain, such as the level of conservation in small RNA composition between species and whether small RNAs control transposable elements in mammalian oocytes.Results Here, we use high-throughput sequencing to profile small RNAs and poly(A)-bearing long RNAs in oocytes of 12 representative vertebrate species (including 11 mammals). The results show that miRNAs are generally expressed in the oocytes of each representative species (although at low levels), whereas endo-siRNAs are specific to mice. Notably, piRNAs are predominant in oocytes of all species (except mice) and vary widely in length. We find PIWIL3-associated piRNAs are widespread in mammals and generally lack 3 '-2 '-O-methylation. Additionally, sequence identity is low between homologous piRNAs in different species, even among those present in syntenic piRNA clusters. Despite the species-specific divergence, piRNAs retain the capacity to silence younger TE subfamilies in oocytes.Conclusions Collectively, our findings illustrate a high level of diversity in the small RNA populations of mammalian oocytes. Furthermore, we identify sequence features related to conserved roles of small RNAs in silencing TEs, providing a large-scale reference for future in-depth study of small RNA functions in oocytes.
Background: Reproductive isolation can result from adaptive processes (e.g., ecological speciation and mutation-order speciation) or stochastic processes such as "system drift" model. Ecological speciation predicts barriers to gene flow between populations from different environments, but not among replicate populations from the same environment. In contrast, reproductive isolation among populations independently adapted to the same/similar environment can arise from both mutation-order speciation or system drift. Results: In experimentally evolved populations adapting to a hot environment for over 100 generations, we find evidence for pre- and postmating reproductive isolation. On one hand, an altered lipid metabolism and cuticular hydrocarbon composition pointed to possible premating barriers between the ancestral and replicate evolved populations. On the other hand, the pronounced gene expression differences in male reproductive genes may underlie the postmating isolation among replicate evolved populations adapting to the same environment with the same standing genetic variation. Conclusion: Our study confirms that replicated evolution experiments provide valuable insights into the mechanisms of speciation. The rapid emergence of the premating reproductive isolation during temperature adaptation showcases incipient ecological speciation. The potential evidence of postmating reproductive isolation among replicates gave rise to two hypotheses: (1) mutation-order speciation through a common selection on early fecundity leading to an inherent inter-locus sexual conflict; (2) system drift with genetic drift along the neutral ridges.
BackgroundComputational cell type deconvolution enables the estimation of cell type abundance from bulk tissues and is important for understanding tissue microenviroment, especially in tumor tissues. With rapid development of deconvolution methods, many benchmarking studies have been published aiming for a comprehensive evaluation for these methods. Benchmarking studies rely on cell-type resolved single-cell RNA-seq data to create simulated pseudobulk datasets by adding individual cells-types in controlled proportions.ResultsIn our work, we show that the standard application of this approach, which uses randomly selected single cells, regardless of the intrinsic difference between them, generates synthetic bulk expression values that lack appropriate biological variance. We demonstrate why and how the current bulk simulation pipeline with random cells is unrealistic and propose a heterogeneous simulation strategy as a solution. The heterogeneously simulated bulk samples match up with the variance observed in real bulk datasets and therefore provide concrete benefits for benchmarking in several ways. We demonstrate that conceptual classes of deconvolution methods differ dramatically in their robustness to heterogeneity with reference-free methods performing particularly poorly. For regression-based methods, the heterogeneous simulation provides an explicit framework to disentangle the contributions of reference construction and regression methods to performance. Finally, we perform an extensive benchmark of diverse methods across eight different datasets and find BayesPrism and a hybrid MuSiC/CIBERSORTx approach to be the top performers.ConclusionsOur heterogeneous bulk simulation method and the entire benchmarking framework is implemented in a user friendly package https://github.com/humengying0907/deconvBenchmarking and https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8206516, enabling further developments in deconvolution methods.
BackgroundSpatial transcriptomics (ST) is advancing our understanding of complex tissues and organisms. However, building a robust clustering algorithm to define spatially coherent regions in a single tissue slice and aligning or integrating multiple tissue slices originating from diverse sources for essential downstream analyses remains challenging. Numerous clustering, alignment, and integration methods have been specifically designed for ST data by leveraging its spatial information. The absence of comprehensive benchmark studies complicates the selection of methods and future method development.ResultsIn this study, we systematically benchmark a variety of state-of-the-art algorithms with a wide range of real and simulated datasets of varying sizes, technologies, species, and complexity. We analyze the strengths and weaknesses of each method using diverse quantitative and qualitative metrics and analyses, including eight metrics for spatial clustering accuracy and contiguity, uniform manifold approximation and projection visualization, layer-wise and spot-to-spot alignment accuracy, and 3D reconstruction, which are designed to assess method performance as well as data quality. The code used for evaluation is available on our GitHub. Additionally, we provide online notebook tutorials and documentation to facilitate the reproduction of all benchmarking results and to support the study of new methods and new datasets.ConclusionsOur analyses lead to comprehensive recommendations that cover multiple aspects, helping users to select optimal tools for their specific needs and guide future method development.
BackgroundAlthough disease-causal genetic variants have been found within silencer sequences, we still lack a comprehensive analysis of the association of silencers with diseases. Here, we profiled GWAS variants in 2.8 million candidate silencers across 97 human samples derived from a diverse panel of tissues and developmental time points, using deep learning models.ResultsWe show that candidate silencers exhibit strong enrichment in disease-associated variants, and several diseases display a much stronger association with silencer variants than enhancer variants. Close to 52% of candidate silencers cluster, forming silencer-rich loci, and, in the loci of Parkinson's-disease-hallmark genes TRIM31 and MAL, the associated SNPs densely populate clustered candidate silencers rather than enhancers displaying an overall twofold enrichment in silencers versus enhancers. The disruption of apoptosis in neuronal cells is associated with both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and can largely be attributed to variants within candidate silencers. Our model permits a mechanistic explanation of causative SNP effects by identifying altered binding of tissue-specific repressors and activators, validated with a 70% of directional concordance using SNP-SELEX. Narrowing the focus of the analysis to individual silencer variants, experimental data confirms the role of the rs62055708 SNP in Parkinson's disease, rs2535629 in schizophrenia, and rs6207121 in type 1 diabetes.ConclusionsIn summary, our results indicate that advances in deep learning models for the discovery of disease-causal variants within candidate silencers effectively "double" the number of functionally characterized GWAS variants. This provides a basis for explaining mechanisms of action and designing novel diagnostics and therapeutics.
Background: Formation of tissue-specific transcriptional programs underlies multicellular development, including dorsoventral (DV) patterning of the Drosophila embryo. This involves interactions between transcriptional enhancers and promoters in a chromatin context, but how the chromatin landscape influences transcription is not fully understood.Results: Here we comprehensively resolve differential transcriptional and chromatin states during Drosophila DV patterning. We find that RNA Polymerase II pausing is established at DV promoters prior to zygotic genome activation (ZGA), that pausing persists irrespective of cell fate, but that release into productive elongation is tightly regulated and accompanied by tissue-specific P-TEFb recruitment. DV enhancers acquire distinct tissue-specific chromatin states through CBP-mediated histone acetylation that predict the transcriptional output of target genes, whereas promoter states are more tissue-invariant. Transcriptome-wide inference of burst kinetics in different cell types revealed that while DV genes are generally characterized by a high burst size, either burst size or frequency can differ between tissues.Conclusions: The data suggest that pausing is established by pioneer transcription factors prior to ZGA and that release from pausing is imparted by enhancer chromatin state to regulate bursting in a tissue-specific manner in the early embryo. Our results uncover how developmental patterning is orchestrated by tissue-specific bursts of transcription from Pol II primed promoters in response to enhancer regulatory cues.
Background: The emergence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus has highlighted the importance of genomic epidemiology in understanding the evolution of pathogens and guiding public health interventions. The Omicron variant in particular has underscored the role of epistasis in the evolution of lineages with both higher infectivity and immune escape, and therefore the necessity to update surveillance pipelines to detect them early on. Results: In this study, we apply a method based on mutual information between positions in a multiple sequence alignment, which is capable of scaling up to millions of samples. We show how it can reliably predict known experimentally validated epistatic interactions, even when using as little as 10,000 sequences, which opens the possibility of making it a near real-time prediction system. We test this possibility by modifying the method to account for the sample collection date and apply it retrospectively to multiple sequence alignments for each month between March 2020 and March 2023. We detected a cornerstone epistatic interaction in the Spike protein between codons 498 and 501 as soon as seven samples with a double mutation were present in the dataset, thus demonstrating the method's sensitivity. We test the ability of the method to make inferences about emerging interactions by testing candidates predicted after March 2023, which we validate experimentally. Conclusions: We show how known epistatic interaction in SARS-CoV-2 can be detected with high sensitivity, and how emerging ones can be quickly prioritized for experimental validation, an approach that could be implemented downstream of pandemic genome sequencing efforts.
BackgroundThe Critical Assessment of Genome Interpretation (CAGI) aims to advance the state-of-the-art for computational prediction of genetic variant impact, particularly where relevant to disease. The five complete editions of the CAGI community experiment comprised 50 challenges, in which participants made blind predictions of phenotypes from genetic data, and these were evaluated by independent assessors.ResultsPerformance was particularly strong for clinical pathogenic variants, including some difficult-to-diagnose cases, and extends to interpretation of cancer-related variants. Missense variant interpretation methods were able to estimate biochemical effects with increasing accuracy. Assessment of methods for regulatory variants and complex trait disease risk was less definitive and indicates performance potentially suitable for auxiliary use in the clinic.ConclusionsResults show that while current methods are imperfect, they have major utility for research and clinical applications. Emerging methods and increasingly large, robust datasets for training and assessment promise further progress ahead.
BackgroundTranscription factors (TFs) bind regulatory genomic regions to orchestrate spatio-temporal expression of target genes. Global dissection of the cistrome is critical for elucidating transcriptional networks underlying complex agronomic traits in crops.ResultsHere, we generate a comprehensive genome-wide binding map for 148 TFs using DNA affinity purification sequencing in soybean. We find TF binding sites (TFBSs) exhibit elevated chromatin accessibility and contain more rare alleles than other genomic regions. Intriguingly, the methylation variations at TFBSs partially contribute to expression bias among whole genome duplication paralogs. Furthermore, we construct a soybean gene regulatory network (SoyGRN) by integrating TF-target interactions with diverse datasets encompassing gene expression, TFBS motifs, chromatin accessibility, and evolutionarily conserved regulation. SoyGRN comprises 2.44 million genome-wide interactions among 3188 TFs and 51,665 target genes. We successfully identify key TFs governing seed coat color and oil content and prioritize candidate genes within quantitative trait loci associated with various agronomic traits using SoyGRN. To accelerate utilization of SoyGRN, we develop an interactive webserver (www.soytfbase.cn) for soybean community to explore functional TFs involved in trait regulation.ConclusionsOverall, our study unravels intricate landscape of TF-target interactions in soybean and provides a valuable resource for dissecting key regulators for control of agronomic traits to accelerate soybean improvement.
BackgroundLactylation, a post-translational modification, is increasingly recognized for its role in cancer progression. This study investigates its prevalence and impact in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).ResultsImmunohistochemical staining of 81 OSCC cases shows lactylation levels correlate with malignancy grading. Proteomic analyses of six OSCC tissue pairs reveal 2765 lactylation sites on 1033 proteins, highlighting its extensive presence. These modifications influence metabolic processes, molecular synthesis, and transport. CAL27 cells are subjected to cleavage under targets and tagmentation assay for accessible-chromatin with high-throughput sequencing, and transcriptomic sequencing pre- and post-lactate treatment, with 217 genes upregulated due to lactylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative PCR and real-time fluorescence quantitative PCR confirm the regulatory role of lactylation at the K146 site of dexh-box helicase 9 (DHX9), a key factor in OSCC progression. CCK8, colony formation, scratch healing, and Transwell assays demonstrate that lactylation mitigates the inhibitory effect of DHX9 on OSCC, thereby promoting its occurrence and development.ConclusionsLactylation actively modulates gene expression in OSCC, with significant effects on chromatin structure and cellular processes. This study provides a foundation for developing targeted therapies against OSCC, leveraging the role of lactylation in disease pathogenesis.
BackgroundMicrosatellite instability (MSI) due to mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) is common in colorectal cancer (CRC). These cancers are associated with somatic coding events, but the noncoding pathophysiological impact of this genomic instability is yet poorly understood. Here, we perform an analysis of coding and noncoding MSI events at the different steps of colorectal tumorigenesis using whole exome sequencing and search for associated splicing events via RNA sequencing at the bulk-tumor and single-cell levels.ResultsOur results demonstrate that MSI leads to hundreds of noncoding DNA mutations, notably at polypyrimidine U2AF RNA-binding sites which are endowed with cis-activity in splicing, while higher frequency of exon skipping events are observed in the mRNAs of MSI compared to non-MSI CRC. At the DNA level, these noncoding MSI mutations occur very early prior to cell transformation in the dMMR colonic crypt, accounting for only a fraction of the exon skipping in MSI CRC. At the RNA level, the aberrant exon skipping signature is likely to impair colonic cell differentiation in MSI CRC affecting the expression of alternative exons encoding protein isoforms governing cell fate, while also targeting constitutive exons, making dMMR cells immunogenic in early stage before the onset of coding mutations. This signature is characterized by its similarity to the oncogenic U2AF1-S34F splicing mutation observed in several other non-MSI cancer.ConclusionsOverall, these findings provide evidence that a very early RNA splicing signature partly driven by MSI impairs cell differentiation and promotes MSI CRC initiation, far before coding mutations which accumulate later during MSI tumorigenesis.
BackgroundRespiratory diseases impose an immense health burden worldwide. Epidemiological studies have revealed extensive disparities in the incidence and severity of respiratory tract infections between men and women. It has been hypothesized that there might also be a nasal microbiome axis contributing to the observed sex disparities.ResultsHere, we study the nasal microbiome of healthy young adults in the largest cohort to date with 1593 individuals, using shotgun metagenomic sequencing. We compile the most comprehensive reference catalog for the nasal bacterial community containing 4197 metagenome-assembled genomes and integrate the mycobiome, to provide a valuable resource and a more holistic perspective for the understudied human nasal microbiome. We systematically evaluate sex differences and reveal extensive sex-specific features in both taxonomic and functional levels in the nasal microbiome. Through network analyses, we capture markedly higher ecological stability and antagonistic potentials in the female nasal microbiome compared to the male's. The analysis of the keystone bacteria reveals that the sex-dependent evolutionary characteristics might have contributed to these differences.ConclusionsIn summary, we construct the most comprehensive catalog of metagenome-assembled-genomes for the nasal bacterial community to provide a valuable resource for the understudied human nasal microbiome. On top of that, comparative analysis in relative abundance and microbial co-occurrence networks identify extensive sex differences in the respiratory tract community, which may help to further our understanding of the observed sex disparities in the respiratory diseases.
Background Aneuploidy, an abnormal number of chromosomes within a cell, is a hallmark of cancer. Patterns of aneuploidy differ across cancers, yet are similar in cancers affecting closely related tissues. The selection pressures underlying aneuploidy patterns are not fully understood, hindering our understanding of cancer development and progression.Results Here, we apply interpretable machine learning methods to study tissue-selective aneuploidy patterns. We define 20 types of features corresponding to genomic attributes of chromosome-arms, normal tissues, primary tumors, and cancer cell lines (CCLs), and use them to model gains and losses of chromosome arms in 24 cancer types. To reveal the factors that shape the tissue-specific cancer aneuploidy landscapes, we interpret the machine learning models by estimating the relative contribution of each feature to the models. While confirming known drivers of positive selection, our quantitative analysis highlights the importance of negative selection for shaping aneuploidy landscapes. This is exemplified by tumor suppressor gene density being a better predictor of gain patterns than oncogene density, and vice versa for loss patterns. We also identify the importance of tissue-selective features and demonstrate them experimentally, revealing KLF5 as an important driver for chr13q gain in colon cancer. Further supporting an important role for negative selection in shaping the aneuploidy landscapes, we find compensation by paralogs to be among the top predictors of chromosome arm loss prevalence and demonstrate this relationship for one paralog interaction. Similar factors shape aneuploidy patterns in human CCLs, demonstrating their relevance for aneuploidy research.Conclusions Our quantitative, interpretable machine learning models improve the understanding of the genomic properties that shape cancer aneuploidy landscapes.
BackgroundThe encoding of cell intrinsic drug resistance states in breast cancer reflects the contributions of genomic and non-genomic variations and requires accurate estimation of clonal fitness from co-measurement of transcriptomic and genomic data. Somatic copy number (CN) variation is the dominant mutational mechanism leading to transcriptional variation and notably contributes to platinum chemotherapy resistance cell states. Here, we deploy time series measurements of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) single-cell transcriptomes, along with co-measured single-cell CN fitness, identifying genomic and transcriptomic mechanisms in drug-associated transcriptional cell states.ResultsWe present scRNA-seq data (53,641 filtered cells) from serial passaging TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) experiments spanning 2.5 years, matched with genomic single-cell CN data from the same samples. Our findings reveal distinct clonal responses within TNBC tumors exposed to platinum. Clones with high drug fitness undergo clonal sweeps and show subtle transcriptional reversion, while those with weak fitness exhibit dynamic transcription upon drug withdrawal. Pathway analysis highlights convergence on epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cytokine signaling, associated with resistance. Furthermore, pseudotime analysis demonstrates hysteresis in transcriptional reversion, indicating generation of new intermediate transcriptional states upon platinum exposure.ConclusionsWithin a polyclonal tumor, clones with strong genotype-associated fitness under platinum remained fixed, minimizing transcriptional reversion upon drug withdrawal. Conversely, clones with weaker fitness display non-genomic transcriptional plasticity. This suggests CN-associated and CN-independent transcriptional states could both contribute to platinum resistance. The dominance of genomic or non-genomic mechanisms within polyclonal tumors has implications for drug sensitivity, restoration, and re-treatment strategies.
Background The rise of large-scale multi-species genome sequencing projects promises to shed new light on how genomes encode gene regulatory instructions. To this end, new algorithms are needed that can leverage conservation to capture regulatory elements while accounting for their evolution.Results Here, we introduce species-aware DNA language models, which we trained on more than 800 species spanning over 500 million years of evolution. Investigating their ability to predict masked nucleotides from context, we show that DNA language models distinguish transcription factor and RNA-binding protein motifs from background non-coding sequence. Owing to their flexibility, DNA language models capture conserved regulatory elements over much further evolutionary distances than sequence alignment would allow. Remarkably, DNA language models reconstruct motif instances bound in vivo better than unbound ones and account for the evolution of motif sequences and their positional constraints, showing that these models capture functional high-order sequence and evolutionary context. We further show that species-aware training yields improved sequence representations for endogenous and MPRA-based gene expression prediction, as well as motif discovery.Conclusions Collectively, these results demonstrate that species-aware DNA language models are a powerful, flexible, and scalable tool to integrate information from large compendia of highly diverged genomes.
BackgroundA number of deep learning models have been developed to predict epigenetic features such as chromatin accessibility from DNA sequence. Model evaluations commonly report performance genome-wide; however, cis regulatory elements (CREs), which play critical roles in gene regulation, make up only a small fraction of the genome. Furthermore, cell type-specific CREs contain a large proportion of complex disease heritability.ResultsWe evaluate genomic deep learning models in chromatin accessibility regions with varying degrees of cell type specificity. We assess two modeling directions in the field: general purpose models trained across thousands of outputs (cell types and epigenetic marks) and models tailored to specific tissues and tasks. We find that the accuracy of genomic deep learning models, including two state-of-the-art general purpose models & horbar;Enformer and Sei & horbar;varies across the genome and is reduced in cell type-specific accessible regions. Using accessibility models trained on cell types from specific tissues, we find that increasing model capacity to learn cell type-specific regulatory syntax & horbar;through single-task learning or high capacity multi-task models & horbar;can improve performance in cell type-specific accessible regions. We also observe that improving reference sequence predictions does not consistently improve variant effect predictions, indicating that novel strategies are needed to improve performance on variants.ConclusionsOur results provide a new perspective on the performance of genomic deep learning models, showing that performance varies across the genome and is particularly reduced in cell type-specific accessible regions. We also identify strategies to maximize performance in cell type-specific accessible regions.
Background Genetic changes that modify the function of transcriptional enhancers have been linked to the evolution of biological diversity across species. Multiple studies have focused on the role of nucleotide substitutions, transposition, and insertions and deletions in altering enhancer function. CpG islands (CGIs) have recently been shown to influence enhancer activity, and here we test how their turnover across species contributes to enhancer evolution.Results We integrate maps of CGIs and enhancer activity-associated histone modifications obtained from multiple tissues in nine mammalian species and find that CGI content in enhancers is strongly associated with increased histone modification levels. CGIs show widespread turnover across species and species-specific CGIs are strongly enriched for enhancers exhibiting species-specific activity across all tissues and species. Genes associated with enhancers with species-specific CGIs show concordant biases in their expression, supporting that CGI turnover contributes to gene regulatory innovation. Our results also implicate CGI turnover in the evolution of Human Gain Enhancers (HGEs), which show increased activity in human embryonic development and may have contributed to the evolution of uniquely human traits. Using a humanized mouse model, we show that a highly conserved HGE with a large CGI absent from the mouse ortholog shows increased activity at the human CGI in the humanized mouse diencephalon.Conclusions Collectively, our results point to CGI turnover as a mechanism driving gene regulatory changes potentially underlying trait evolution in mammals.
In non-polarized cells, nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) generally begins during the translation of newly synthesized mRNAs after the mRNAs are exported to the cytoplasm. Binding of the FMRP translational repressor to UPF1 on NMD targets mainly inhibits NMD. However, in polarized cells like neurons, FMRP additionally localizes mRNAs to cellular projections. Here, we review the literature and evaluate available transcriptomic data to conclude that, in neurons, the translation of physiologic NMD targets bound by FMRP is partially inhibited until the mRNAs localize to projections. There, FMRP displacement in response to signaling induces a burst in protein synthesis followed by rapid mRNA decay.
Simultaneous profiling of single-cell gene expression and lineage history holds enormous potential for studying cellular decision-making. Recent computational approaches combine both modalities into cellular trajectories; however, they cannot make use of all available lineage information in destructive time-series experiments. Here, we present moslin, a Gromov-Wasserstein-based model to couple cellular profiles across time points based on lineage and gene expression information. We validate our approach in simulations and demonstrate on Caenorhabditis elegans embryonic development how moslin predicts fate probabilities and putative decision driver genes. Finally, we use moslin to delineate lineage relationships among transiently activated fibroblast states during zebrafish heart regeneration.
BackgroundThe cost-free increase in statistical power of using imputation to infer missing genotypes is undoubtedly appealing, but is it hazard-free? This case study of three type-2 diabetes (T2D) loci demonstrates that it is not; it sheds light on why this is so and raises concerns as to the shortcomings of imputation at disease loci, where haplotypes differ between cases and reference panel.ResultsT2D-associated variants were previously identified using targeted sequencing. We removed these significantly associated SNPs and used neighbouring SNPs to infer them by imputation. We compared imputed with observed genotypes, examined the altered pattern of T2D-SNP association, and investigated the cause of imputation errors by studying haplotype structure. Most T2D variants were incorrectly imputed with a low density of scaffold SNPs, but the majority failed to impute even at high density, despite obtaining high certainty scores. Missing and discordant imputation errors, which were observed disproportionately for the risk alleles, produced monomorphic genotype calls or false-negative associations. We show that haplotypes carrying risk alleles are considerably more common in the T2D cases than the reference panel, for all loci.ConclusionsImputation is not a panacea for fine mapping, nor for meta-analysing multiple GWAS based on different arrays and different populations. A total of 80% of the SNPs we have tested are not included in array platforms, explaining why these and other such associated variants may previously have been missed. Regardless of the choice of software and reference haplotypes, imputation drives genotype inference towards the reference panel, introducing errors at disease loci.
Spatial transcriptomics is a cutting-edge technique that combines gene expression with spatial information, allowing researchers to study molecular patterns within tissue architecture. Here, we present IAMSAM, a user-friendly web-based tool for analyzing spatial transcriptomics data focusing on morphological features. IAMSAM accurately segments tissue images using the Segment Anything Model, allowing for the semi-automatic selection of regions of interest based on morphological signatures. Furthermore, IAMSAM provides downstream analysis, such as identifying differentially expressed genes, enrichment analysis, and cell type prediction within the selected regions. With its simple interface, IAMSAM empowers researchers to explore and interpret heterogeneous tissues in a streamlined manner.
BackgroundOncometabolites, often generated as a result of a gene mutation, show pro-oncogenic function when abnormally accumulated in cancer cells. Identification of such mutation-associated metabolites will facilitate developing treatment strategies for cancers, but is challenging due to the large number of metabolites in a cell and the presence of multiple genes associated with cancer development.ResultsHere we report the development of a computational workflow that predicts metabolite-gene-pathway sets. Metabolite-gene-pathway sets present metabolites and metabolic pathways significantly associated with specific somatic mutations in cancers. The computational workflow uses both cancer patient-specific genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) and mutation data to generate metabolite-gene-pathway sets. A GEM is a computational model that predicts reaction fluxes at a genome scale and can be constructed in a cell-specific manner by using omics data. The computational workflow is first validated by comparing the resulting metabolite-gene pairs with multi-omics data (i.e., mutation data, RNA-seq data, and metabolome data) from acute myeloid leukemia and renal cell carcinoma samples collected in this study. The computational workflow is further validated by evaluating the metabolite-gene-pathway sets predicted for 18 cancer types, by using RNA-seq data publicly available, in comparison with the reported studies. Therapeutic potential of the resulting metabolite-gene-pathway sets is also discussed.ConclusionsValidation of the metabolite-gene-pathway set-predicting computational workflow indicates that a decent number of metabolites and metabolic pathways appear to be significantly associated with specific somatic mutations. The computational workflow and the resulting metabolite-gene-pathway sets will help identify novel oncometabolites and also suggest cancer treatment strategies.
Typical clustering methods for single-cell and spatial transcriptomics struggle to identify rare cell types, while approaches tailored to detect rare cell types gain this ability at the cost of poorer performance for grouping abundant ones. Here, we develop aKNNO to simultaneously identify abundant and rare cell types based on an adaptive k-nearest neighbor graph with optimization. Benchmarking on 38 simulated and 20 single-cell and spatial transcriptomics datasets demonstrates that aKNNO identifies both abundant and rare cell types more accurately than general and specialized methods. Using only gene expression aKNNO maps abundant and rare cells more precisely compared to integrative approaches.
Background Pluripotent states of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) with distinct transcriptional profiles affect ESC differentiative capacity and therapeutic potential. Although single-cell RNA sequencing has revealed additional subpopulations and specific features of naive and primed human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), the underlying mechanisms that regulate their specific transcription and that control their pluripotent states remain elusive.Results By single-cell analysis of high-resolution, three-dimensional (3D) genomic structure, we herein demonstrate that remodeling of genomic structure is highly associated with the pluripotent states of human ESCs (hESCs). The naive pluripotent state is featured with specialized 3D genomic structures and clear chromatin compartmentalization that is distinct from the primed state. The naive pluripotent state is achieved by remodeling the active euchromatin compartment and reducing chromatin interactions at the nuclear center. This unique genomic organization is linked to enhanced chromatin accessibility on enhancers and elevated expression levels of naive pluripotent genes localized to this region. In contradistinction, the primed state exhibits intermingled genomic organization. Moreover, active euchromatin and primed pluripotent genes are distributed at the nuclear periphery, while repressive heterochromatin is densely concentrated at the nuclear center, reducing chromatin accessibility and the transcription of naive genes.Conclusions Our data provide insights into the chromatin structure of ESCs in their naive and primed states, and we identify specific patterns of modifications in transcription and chromatin structure that might explain the genes that are differentially expressed between naive and primed hESCs. Thus, the inversion or relocation of heterochromatin to euchromatin via compartmentalization is related to the regulation of chromatin accessibility, thereby defining pluripotent states and cellular identity.
Background Epigenetic marks are reprogrammed during sexual reproduction. In flowering plants, DNA methylation is only partially remodeled in the gametes and the zygote. However, the timing and functional significance of the remodeling during plant gametogenesis remain obscure.Results Here we show that DNA methylation remodeling starts after male meiosis in rice, with non-CG methylation, particularly at CHG sites, being first enhanced in the microspore and subsequently decreased in sperm. Functional analysis of rice CHG methyltransferase genes CMT3a and CMT3b indicates that CMT3a functions as the major CHG methyltransferase in rice meiocyte, while CMT3b is responsible for the increase of CHG methylation in microspore. The function of the two histone demethylases JMJ706 and JMJ707 that remove H3K9me2 may contribute to the decreased CHG methylation in sperm. During male gametogenesis CMT3a mainly silences TE and TE-related genes while CMT3b is required for repression of genes encoding factors involved in transcriptional and translational activities. In addition, CMT3b functions to repress zygotic gene expression in egg and participates in establishing the zygotic epigenome upon fertilization.Conclusion Collectively, the results indicate that DNA methylation is dynamically remodeled during male gametogenesis, distinguish the function of CMT3a and CMT3b in sex cells, and underpin the functional significance of DNA methylation remodeling during rice reproduction.
Background Transcription factors (TFs) bind to DNA in a highly sequence-specific manner. This specificity manifests itself in vivo as differences in TF occupancy between the two alleles at heterozygous loci. Genome-scale assays such as ChIP-seq currently are limited in their power to detect allele-specific binding (ASB) both in terms of read coverage and representation of individual variants in the cell lines used. This makes prediction of allelic differences in TF binding from sequence alone desirable, provided that the reliability of such predictions can be quantitatively assessed. Results We here propose methods for benchmarking sequence-to-affinity models for TF binding in terms of their ability to predict allelic imbalances in ChIP-seq counts. We use a likelihood function based on an over-dispersed binomial distribution to aggregate evidence for allelic preference across the genome without requiring statistical significance for individual variants. This allows us to systematically compare predictive performance when multiple binding models for the same TF are available. To facilitate the de novo inference of high-quality models from paired-end in vivo binding data such as ChIP-seq, ChIP-exo, and CUT&Tag without read mapping or peak calling, we introduce an extensible reimplementation of our biophysically interpretable machine learning framework named PyProBound. Explicitly accounting for assay-specific bias in DNA fragmentation rate when training on ChIP-seq yields improved TF binding models. Moreover, we show how PyProBound can leverage our threshold-free ASB likelihood function to perform de novo motif discovery using allele-specific ChIP-seq counts. Conclusion Our work provides new strategies for predicting the functional impact of non-coding variants.
BackgroundSynthetic CRISPR-Cas9 gene drive has been developed to control harmful species. However, resistance to Cas9 gene drive can be acquired easily when DNA repair mechanisms patch up the genetic insults introduced by Cas9 and incorporate mutations to the sgRNA target. Although many strategies to reduce the occurrence of resistance have been developed so far, they are difficult to implement and not always effective.ResultsHere, Cas12f1, a recently developed CRISPR-Cas system with minimal potential for causing mutations within target sequences, has been explored as a potential platform for yielding low-resistance in gene drives. We construct Cas9 and Cas12f1 gene drives in a fast-replicating DNA virus, HSV1. Cas9 and Cas12f1 gene drives are able to spread among the HSV1 population with specificity towards their target sites, and their transmission among HSV1 viruses is not significantly affected by the reduced fitness incurred by the viral carriers. Cas12f1 gene drives spread similarly as Cas9 gene drives at high introduction frequency but transmit more slowly than Cas9 gene drives at low introduction frequency. However, Cas12f1 gene drives outperform Cas9 gene drives because they reach higher penetration and induce lower resistance than Cas9 gene drives in all cases.ConclusionsDue to lower resistance and higher penetration, Cas12f1 gene drives could potentially supplant Cas9 gene drives for population control.
BackgroundGenetic perturbation screens with single-cell readouts have enabled rich phenotyping of gene function and regulatory networks. These approaches have been challenging in vivo, especially in adult disease models such as cancer, which include mixtures of malignant and microenvironment cells. Glioblastoma (GBM) is a fatal cancer, and methods of systematically interrogating gene function and therapeutic targets in vivo, especially in combination with standard of care treatment such as radiotherapy, are lacking.ResultsHere, we iteratively develop a multiplex in vivo perturb-seq CRISPRi platform for single-cell genetic screens in cancer and tumor microenvironment cells that leverages intracranial convection enhanced delivery of sgRNA libraries into mouse models of GBM. Our platform enables potent silencing of drivers of in vivo growth and tumor maintenance as well as genes that sensitize GBM to radiotherapy. We find radiotherapy rewires transcriptional responses to genetic perturbations in an in vivo-dependent manner, revealing heterogenous patterns of treatment sensitization or resistance in GBM. Furthermore, we demonstrate targeting of genes that function in the tumor microenvironment, enabling alterations of ligand-receptor interactions between immune and stromal cells following in vivo CRISPRi perturbations that can affect tumor cell phagocytosis.ConclusionIn sum, we demonstrate the utility of multiplexed perturb-seq for in vivo single-cell dissection of adult cancer and normal tissue biology across multiple cell types in the context of therapeutic intervention, a platform with potential for broad application.
Background: Root nodule symbiosis (RNS) is a fascinating evolutionary event. Given that limited genes conferring the evolution of RNS in Leguminosae have been functionally validated, the genetic basis of the evolution of RNS remains largely unknown. Identifying the genes involved in the evolution of RNS will help to reveal the mystery. Results: Here, we investigate the gene loss event during the evolution of RNS in Leguminosae through phylogenomic and synteny analyses in 48 species including 16 Leguminosae species. We reveal that loss of the Lateral suppressor gene, a member of the GRAS-domain protein family, is associated with the evolution of RNS in Leguminosae. Ectopic expression of the Lateral suppressor (Ls) gene from tomato and its homolog MONOCULM 1 (MOC1) and Os7 from rice in soybean and Medicago truncatula result in almost completely lost nodulation capability. Further investigation shows that Lateral suppressor protein, Ls, MOC1, and Os7 might function through an interaction with NODULATION SIGNALING PATHWAY 2 (NSP2) and CYCLOPS to repress the transcription of NODULE INCEPTION (NIN) to inhibit the nodulation in Leguminosae. Additionally, we find that the cathepsin H (CTSH), a conserved protein, could interact with Lateral suppressor protein, Ls, MOC1, and Os7 and affect the nodulation. Conclusions: This study sheds light on uncovering the genetic basis of the evolution of RNS in Leguminosae and suggests that gene loss plays an essential role.
Background High-efficiency prime editing (PE) is desirable for precise genome manipulation. The activity of mammalian PE systems can be largely improved by inhibiting DNA mismatch repair by coexpressing a dominant-negative variant of MLH1. However, this strategy has not been widely used for PE optimization in plants, possibly because of its less conspicuous effects and inconsistent performance at different sites. Results We show that direct RNAi knockdown of OsMLH1 in an ePE5c system increases the efficiency of our most recently updated PE tool by 1.30- to 2.11-fold in stably transformed rice cells, resulting in as many as 85.42% homozygous mutants in the T-0 generation. The high specificity of ePE5c is revealed by whole-genome sequencing. To overcome the partial sterility induced by OsMLH1 knockdown of ePE5c, a conditional excision system is introduced to remove the RNAi module by Cre-mediated site-specific recombination. Using a simple approach of enriching excision events, we generate 100% RNAi module-free plants in the T0 generation. The increase in efficiency due to OsMLH1 knockdown is maintained in the excised plants, whose fertility is not impaired. Conclusions This study provides a safe and reliable plant PE optimization strategy for improving editing efficiency without disturbing plant development via transient MMR inhibition with an excisable RNAi module of MLH1.
Background Winter wheat undergoes vernalization, a process activated by prolonged exposure to low temperatures. During this phase, flowering signals are generated and transported to the apical meristems, stimulating the transition to the inflorescence meristem while inhibiting tiller bud elongation. Although some vernalization genes have been identified, the key cis-regulatory elements and precise mechanisms governing this process in wheat remain largely unknown. Results In this study, we construct extensive epigenomic and transcriptomic profiling across multiple tissues-leaf, axillary bud, and shoot apex-during the vernalization of winter wheat. Epigenetic modifications play a crucial role in eliciting tissue-specific responses and sub-genome-divergent expressions during vernalization. Notably, we observe that H3K27me3 primarily regulates vernalization-induced genes and has limited influence on vernalization-repressed genes. The integration of these datasets enables the identification of 10,600 putative vernalization-related regulatory elements including distal accessible chromatin regions (ACRs) situated 30Kb upstream of VRN3, contributing to the construction of a comprehensive regulatory network. Furthermore, we discover that TaSPL7/15, integral components of the aging-related flowering pathway, interact with the VRN1 promoter and VRN3 distal regulatory elements. These interactions finely regulate their expressions, consequently impacting the vernalization process and flowering. Conclusions Our study offers critical insights into wheat vernalization's epigenomic dynamics and identifies the putative regulatory elements crucial for developing wheat germplasm with varied vernalization characteristics. It also establishes a vernalization-related transcriptional network, and uncovers that TaSPL7/15 from the aging pathway participates in vernalization by directly binding to the VRN1 promoter and VRN3 distal regulatory elements.
BackgroundPlants respond to environmental stimuli by altering gene transcription that is highly related with chromatin status, including histone modification, chromatin accessibility, and three-dimensional chromatin interaction. Vernalization is essential for the transition to reproductive growth for winter wheat. How wheat reshapes its chromatin features, especially chromatin interaction during vernalization, remains unknown.ResultsCombinatory analysis of gene transcription and histone modifications in winter wheat under different vernalization conditions identifies 17,669 differential expressed genes and thousands of differentially enriched peaks of H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and H3K9ac. We find dynamic gene expression across the vernalization process is highly associated with H3K4me3. More importantly, the dynamic H3K4me3- and H3K9ac-associated chromatin-chromatin interactions demonstrate that vernalization leads to increased chromatin interactions and gene activation. Remarkably, spatially distant targets of master regulators like VRN1 and VRT2 are gathered together by chromatin loops to achieve efficient transcription regulation, which is designated as a "shepherd" model. Furthermore, by integrating gene regulatory network for vernalization and natural variation of flowering time, TaZNF10 is identified as a negative regulator for vernalization-related flowering time in wheat.ConclusionsWe reveal dynamic gene transcription network during vernalization and find that the spatially distant genes can be recruited together via chromatin loops associated with active histone mark thus to be more efficiently found and bound by upstream regulator. It provides new insights into understanding vernalization and response to environmental stimuli in wheat and other plants.
BackgroundStructural variation (SV) detection methods using third-generation sequencing data are widely employed, yet accurately detecting SVs remains challenging. Different methods often yield inconsistent results for certain SV types, complicating tool selection and revealing biases in detection.ResultsThis study comprehensively evaluates 53 SV detection pipelines using simulated and real data from PacBio (CLR: Continuous Long Read, CCS: Circular Consensus Sequencing) and Nanopore (ONT) platforms. We assess their performance in detecting various sizes and types of SVs, breakpoint biases, and genotyping accuracy with various sequencing depths. Notably, pipelines such as Minimap2-cuteSV2, NGMLR-SVIM, PBMM2-pbsv, Winnowmap-Sniffles2, and Winnowmap-SVision exhibit comparatively higher recall and precision. Our findings also show that combining multiple pipelines with the same aligner, like pbmm2 or winnowmap, can significantly enhance performance. The individual pipelines' detailed ranking and performance metrics can be viewed in a dynamic table: http://pmglab.top/SVPipelinesRanking.ConclusionsThis study comprehensively characterizes the strengths and weaknesses of numerous pipelines, providing valuable insights that can improve SV detection in third-generation sequencing data and inform SV annotation and function prediction.
Background: B-type lamins are critical nuclear envelope proteins that interact with the three-dimensional genomic architecture. However, identifying the direct roles of B-lamins on dynamic genome organization has been challenging as their joint depletion severely impacts cell viability. To overcome this, we engineered mammalian cells to rapidly and completely degrade endogenous B-type lamins using Auxin-inducible degron technology. Results: Using live-cell Dual Partial Wave Spectroscopic (Dual-PWS) microscopy, Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM), in situ Hi-C, CRISPR-Sirius, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), we demonstrate that lamin B1 and lamin B2 are critical structural components of the nuclear periphery that create a repressive compartment for peripheral-associated genes. Lamin B1 and lamin B2 depletion minimally alters higher-order chromatin folding but disrupts cell morphology, significantly increases chromatin mobility, redistributes both constitutive and facultative heterochromatin, and induces differential gene expression both within and near lamin-associated domain (LAD) boundaries. Critically, we demonstrate that chromatin territories expand as upregulated genes within LADs radially shift inwards. Our results indicate that the mechanism of action of B-type lamins comes from their role in constraining chromatin motion and spatial positioning of gene-specific loci, heterochromatin, and chromatin domains. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that, while B-type lamin degradation does not significantly change genome topology, it has major implications for three-dimensional chromatin conformation at the single-cell level both at the lamina-associated periphery and the non-LAD-associated nuclear interior with concomitant genome-wide transcriptional changes. This raises intriguing questions about the individual and overlapping roles of lamin B1 and lamin B2 in cellular function and disease.
BackgroundNeural tube defects (NTDs) are caused by genetic and environmental factors. ARMC5 is part of a novel ubiquitin ligase specific for POLR2A, the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (Pol II).ResultsWe find that ARMC5 knockout mice have increased incidence of NTDs, such as spina bifida and exencephaly. Surprisingly, the absence of ARMC5 causes the accumulation of not only POLR2A but also most of the other 11 Pol II subunits, indicating that the degradation of the whole Pol II complex is compromised. The enlarged Pol II pool does not lead to generalized Pol II stalling or a generalized decrease in mRNA transcription. In neural progenitor cells, ARMC5 knockout only dysregulates 106 genes, some of which are known to be involved in neural tube development. FOLH1, critical in folate uptake and hence neural tube development, is downregulated in the knockout intestine. We also identify nine deleterious mutations in the ARMC5 gene in 511 patients with myelomeningocele, a severe form of spina bifida. These mutations impair the interaction between ARMC5 and Pol II and reduce Pol II ubiquitination.ConclusionsMutations in ARMC5 increase the risk of NTDs in mice and humans. ARMC5 is part of an E3 controlling the degradation of all 12 subunits of Pol II under physiological conditions. The Pol II pool size might have effects on NTD pathogenesis, and some of the effects might be via the downregulation of FOLH1. Additional mechanistic work is needed to establish the causal effect of the findings on NTD pathogenesis.
BackgroundSingle-cell chromatin accessibility assays, such as scATAC-seq, are increasingly employed in individual and joint multi-omic profiling of single cells. As the accumulation of scATAC-seq and multi-omics datasets continue, challenges in analyzing such sparse, noisy, and high-dimensional data become pressing. Specifically, one challenge relates to optimizing the processing of chromatin-level measurements and efficiently extracting information to discern cellular heterogeneity. This is of critical importance, since the identification of cell types is a fundamental step in current single-cell data analysis practices.ResultsWe benchmark 8 feature engineering pipelines derived from 5 recent methods to assess their ability to discover and discriminate cell types. By using 10 metrics calculated at the cell embedding, shared nearest neighbor graph, or partition levels, we evaluate the performance of each method at different data processing stages. This comprehensive approach allows us to thoroughly understand the strengths and weaknesses of each method and the influence of parameter selection.ConclusionsOur analysis provides guidelines for choosing analysis methods for different datasets. Overall, feature aggregation, SnapATAC, and SnapATAC2 outperform latent semantic indexing-based methods. For datasets with complex cell-type structures, SnapATAC and SnapATAC2 are preferred. With large datasets, SnapATAC2 and ArchR are most scalable.
Background: The shoot apical meristem (SAM), from which all above-ground tissues of plants are derived, is critical to plant morphology and development. In maize (Zea mays), loss-of-function mutant studies have identified several SAM-related genes, most encoding homeobox transcription factors (TFs), located upstream of hierarchical networks of hundreds of genes. Results: Here, we collect 46 transcriptome and 16 translatome datasets across 62 different tissues or stages from the maize inbred line B73. We construct a dynamic regulome for 27 members of three SAM-related homeobox subfamilies (KNOX, WOX, and ZF-HD) through machine-learning models for the detection of TF targets across different tissues and stages by combining tsCUT&Tag, ATAC-seq, and expression profiling. This dynamic regulome demonstrates the distinct binding specificity and co-factors for these homeobox subfamilies, indicative of functional divergence between and within them. Furthermore, we assemble a SAM dynamic regulome, illustrating potential functional mechanisms associated with plant architecture. Lastly, we generate a wox13a mutant that provides evidence that WOX13A directly regulates Gn1 expression to modulate plant height, validating the regulome of SAM-related homeobox genes. Conclusions: The SAM-related homeobox transcription-factor regulome presents an unprecedented opportunity to dissect the molecular mechanisms governing SAM maintenance and development, thereby advancing our understanding of maize growth and shoot architecture.
BackgroundThe mitosis-to-meiosis switch during spermatogenesis requires dynamic changes in gene expression. However, the regulation of meiotic transcriptional and post-transcriptional machinery during this transition remains elusive.ResultsWe report that methyltransferase-like protein 16 (METTL16), an N6-methyladenosine (m6A) writer, is required for mitosis-to-meiosis transition during spermatogenesis. Germline conditional knockout of Mettl16 in male mice impairs spermatogonial differentiation and meiosis initiation. Mechanistically, METTL16 interacts with splicing factors to regulate the alternative splicing of meiosis-related genes such as Stag3. Ribosome profiling reveals that the translation efficiency of many meiotic genes is dysregulated in METTL16-deficient testes. m6A-sequencing shows that ablation of METTL16 causes upregulation of the m6A-enriched transcripts and downregulation of the m6A-depleted transcripts, similar to Meioc and/or Ythdc2 mutants. Further in vivo and in vitro experiments demonstrate that the methyltransferase activity site (PP185-186AA) of METTL16 is necessary for spermatogenesis.ConclusionsOur findings support a molecular model wherein the m6A writer METTL16-mediated alternative splicing and translation efficiency regulation are required to control the mitosis-to-meiosis germ cell fate decision in mice, with implications for understanding meiosis-related male fertility disorders.
The spatial organization of molecules in a cell is essential for their functions. While current methods focus on discerning tissue architecture, cell-cell interactions, and spatial expression patterns, they are limited to the multicellular scale. We present Bento, a Python toolkit that takes advantage of single-molecule information to enable spatial analysis at the subcellular scale. Bento ingests molecular coordinates and segmentation boundaries to perform three analyses: defining subcellular domains, annotating localization patterns, and quantifying gene-gene colocalization. We demonstrate MERFISH, seqFISH + , Molecular Cartography, and Xenium datasets. Bento is part of the open-source Scverse ecosystem, enabling integration with other single-cell analysis tools.
Background Targeted therapies exploiting vulnerabilities of cancer cells hold promise for improving patient outcome and reducing side-effects of chemotherapy. However, efficacy of precision therapies is limited in part because of tumor cell heterogeneity. A better mechanistic understanding of how drug effect is linked to cancer cell state diversity is crucial for identifying effective combination therapies that can prevent disease recurrence.Results Here, we characterize the effect of G2/M checkpoint inhibition in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and demonstrate that WEE1 targeted therapy impinges on cell fate decision regulatory circuits. We find the highest inhibition of recovery of proliferation in ALL cells with KMT2A-rearrangements. Single-cell RNA-seq and ATAC-seq of RS4;11 cells harboring KMT2A::AFF1, treated with the WEE1 inhibitor AZD1775, reveal diversification of cell states, with a fraction of cells exhibiting strong activation of p53-driven processes linked to apoptosis and senescence, and disruption of a core KMT2A-RUNX1-MYC regulatory network. In this cell state diversification induced by WEE1 inhibition, a subpopulation transitions to a drug tolerant cell state characterized by activation of transcription factors regulating pre-B cell fate, lipid metabolism, and pre-BCR signaling in a reversible manner. Sequential treatment with BCR-signaling inhibitors dasatinib, ibrutinib, or perturbing metabolism by fatostatin or AZD2014 effectively counteracts drug tolerance by inducing cell death and repressing stemness markers.Conclusions Collectively, our findings provide new insights into the tight connectivity of gene regulatory programs associated with cell cycle and cell fate regulation, and a rationale for sequential administration of WEE1 inhibitors with low toxicity inhibitors of pre-BCR signaling or metabolism.
BackgroundDiffuse invasion of glioblastoma cells through normal brain tissue is a key contributor to tumor aggressiveness, resistance to conventional therapies, and dismal prognosis in patients. A deeper understanding of how components of the tumor microenvironment (TME) contribute to overall tumor organization and to programs of invasion may reveal opportunities for improved therapeutic strategies.ResultsTowards this goal, we apply a novel computational workflow to a spatiotemporally profiled GBM xenograft cohort, leveraging the ability to distinguish human tumor from mouse TME to overcome previous limitations in the analysis of diffuse invasion. Our analytic approach, based on unsupervised deconvolution, performs reference-free discovery of cell types and cell activities within the complete GBM ecosystem. We present a comprehensive catalogue of 15 tumor cell programs set within the spatiotemporal context of 90 mouse brain and TME cell types, cell activities, and anatomic structures. Distinct tumor programs related to invasion align with routes of perivascular, white matter, and parenchymal invasion. Furthermore, sub-modules of genes serving as program network hubs are highly prognostic in GBM patients.ConclusionThe compendium of programs presented here provides a basis for rational targeting of tumor and/or TME components. We anticipate that our approach will facilitate an ecosystem-level understanding of the immediate and long-term consequences of such perturbations, including the identification of compensatory programs that will inform improved combinatorial therapies.
Potato is one of the world's major staple crops, and like many important crop plants, it has a polyploid genome. Polyploid haplotype assembly poses a major computational challenge. We introduce a novel strategy for the assembly of polyploid genomes and present an assembly of the autotetraploid potato cultivar Altus. Our method uses low-depth sequencing data from an offspring population to achieve chromosomal clustering and haplotype phasing on the assembly graph. Our approach generates high-quality assemblies of individual chromosomes with haplotype-specific sequence resolution of whole chromosome arms and can be applied in common breeding scenarios where collections of offspring are available.
Background In dinoflagellates, a unique and extremely divergent genomic and nuclear organization has evolved. The highly unusual features of dinoflagellate nuclei and genomes include permanently condensed liquid crystalline chromosomes, primarily packaged by proteins other than histones, genes organized in very long unidirectional gene arrays, a general absence of transcriptional regulation, high abundance of the otherwise very rare DNA modification 5-hydroxymethyluracil (5-hmU), and many others. While most of these fascinating properties are originally identified in the 1970s and 1980s, they have not yet been investigated using modern genomic tools. Results In this work, we address some of the outstanding questions regarding dinoflagellate genome organization by mapping the genome-wide distribution of 5-hmU (using both immunoprecipitation-based and basepair-resolution chemical mapping approaches) and of chromatin accessibility in the genome of the Symbiodiniaceae dinoflagellate Breviolum minutum. We find that the 5-hmU modification is preferentially enriched over certain classes of repetitive elements, often coincides with the boundaries between gene arrays, and is generally correlated with decreased chromatin accessibility, the latter otherwise being largely uniform along the genome. We discuss the potential roles of 5-hmU in the functional organization of dinoflagellate genomes and its relationship to the transcriptional landscape of gene arrays. Conclusions Our results provide the first window into the 5-hmU and chromatin accessibility landscapes in dinoflagellates.
Existing methods for analysis of spatial transcriptomic data focus on delineating the global gene expression variations of cell types across the tissue, rather than local gene expression changes driven by cell-cell interactions. We propose a new statistical procedure called niche-differential expression (niche-DE) analysis that identifies cell-type-specific niche-associated genes, which are differentially expressed within a specific cell type in the context of specific spatial niches. We further develop niche-LR, a method to reveal ligand-receptor signaling mechanisms that underlie niche-differential gene expression patterns. Niche-DE and niche-LR are applicable to low-resolution spot-based spatial transcriptomics data and data that is single-cell or subcellular in resolution.
Background Copy number variation (CNV) is a key genetic characteristic for cancer diagnostics and can be used as a biomarker for the selection of therapeutic treatments. Using data sets established in our previous study, we benchmark the performance of cancer CNV calling by six most recent and commonly used software tools on their detection accuracy, sensitivity, and reproducibility. In comparison to other orthogonal methods, such as microarray and Bionano, we also explore the consistency of CNV calling across different technologies on a challenging genome.Results While consistent results are observed for copy gain, loss, and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) calls across sequencing centers, CNV callers, and different technologies, variation of CNV calls are mostly affected by the determination of genome ploidy. Using consensus results from six CNV callers and confirmation from three orthogonal methods, we establish a high confident CNV call set for the reference cancer cell line (HCC1395).Conclusions NGS technologies and current bioinformatics tools can offer reliable results for detection of copy gain, loss, and LOH. However, when working with a hyper-diploid genome, some software tools can call excessive copy gain or loss due to inaccurate assessment of genome ploidy. With performance matrices on various experimental conditions, this study raises awareness within the cancer research community for the selection of sequencing platforms, sample preparation, sequencing coverage, and the choice of CNV detection tools.
BackgroundCells and tissues have a remarkable ability to adapt to genetic perturbations via a variety of molecular mechanisms. Nonsense-induced transcriptional compensation, a form of transcriptional adaptation, has recently emerged as one such mechanism, in which nonsense mutations in a gene trigger upregulation of related genes, possibly conferring robustness at cellular and organismal levels. However, beyond a handful of developmental contexts and curated sets of genes, no comprehensive genome-wide investigation of this behavior has been undertaken for mammalian cell types and conditions. How the regulatory-level effects of inherently stochastic compensatory gene networks contribute to phenotypic penetrance in single cells remains unclear.ResultsWe analyze existing bulk and single-cell transcriptomic datasets to uncover the prevalence of transcriptional adaptation in mammalian systems across diverse contexts and cell types. We perform regulon gene expression analyses of transcription factor target sets in both bulk and pooled single-cell genetic perturbation datasets. Our results reveal greater robustness in expression of regulons of transcription factors exhibiting transcriptional adaptation compared to those of transcription factors that do not. Stochastic mathematical modeling of minimal compensatory gene networks qualitatively recapitulates several aspects of transcriptional adaptation, including paralog upregulation and robustness to mutation. Combined with machine learning analysis of network features of interest, our framework offers potential explanations for which regulatory steps are most important for transcriptional adaptation.ConclusionsOur integrative approach identifies several putative hits-genes demonstrating possible transcriptional adaptation-to follow-up on experimentally and provides a formal quantitative framework to test and refine models of transcriptional adaptation.
BackgroundAtypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (ATRT) are incurable high-grade pediatric brain tumors. Despite intensive research efforts, the prognosis for ATRT patients under currently established treatment protocols is poor. While novel therapeutic strategies are urgently needed, the generation of molecular-driven treatment concepts is a challenge mainly due to the absence of actionable genetic alterations.ResultsWe here use a functional genomics approach to identify genetic dependencies in ATRT, validate selected hits using a functionally instructed small molecule drug library, and observe preferential activity in ATRT cells without subgroup-specific selectivity. CDK4/6 inhibitors are among the most potent drugs and display anti-tumor efficacy due to mutual exclusive dependency on CDK4 or CDK6. Chemogenetic interactor screens reveal a broad spectrum of G1 phase cell cycle regulators that differentially enable cell cycle progression and modulate response to CDK4/6 inhibition in ATRT cells. In this regard, we find that the ubiquitin ligase substrate receptor AMBRA1 acts as a context-specific inhibitor of cell cycle progression by regulating key components of mitosis including aurora kinases.ConclusionsOur data provide a comprehensive resource of genetic and chemical dependencies in ATRTs, which will inform further preclinical evaluation of novel targeted therapies for this tumor entity. Furthermore, this study reveals a unique mechanism of cell cycle inhibition as the basis for tumor suppressive functions of AMBRA1.
Background Telomeres form repeated DNA sequences at the ends of chromosomes, which shorten with each cell division. Yet, factors modulating telomere attrition and the health consequences thereof are not fully understood. To address this, we leveraged data from 326,363 unrelated UK Biobank participants of European ancestry.Results Using linear regression and bidirectional univariable and multivariable Mendelian randomization (MR), we elucidate the relationships between leukocyte telomere length (LTL) and 142 complex traits, including diseases, biomarkers, and lifestyle factors. We confirm that telomeres shorten with age and show a stronger decline in males than in females, with these factors contributing to the majority of the 5.4% of LTL variance explained by the phenome. MR reveals 23 traits modulating LTL. Smoking cessation and high educational attainment associate with longer LTL, while weekly alcohol intake, body mass index, urate levels, and female reproductive events, such as childbirth, associate with shorter LTL. We also identify 24 traits affected by LTL, with risk for cardiovascular, pulmonary, and some autoimmune diseases being increased by short LTL, while longer LTL increased risk for other autoimmune conditions and cancers. Through multivariable MR, we show that LTL may partially mediate the impact of educational attainment, body mass index, and female age at childbirth on proxied lifespan.Conclusions Our study sheds light on the modulators, consequences, and the mediatory role of telomeres, portraying an intricate relationship between LTL, diseases, lifestyle, and socio-economic factors.
Background Prime editing enables precise base substitutions, insertions, and deletions at targeted sites without the involvement of double-strand DNA breaks or exogenous donor DNA templates. However, the large size of prime editors (PEs) hampers their delivery in vivo via adeno-associated virus (AAV) due to the viral packaging limit. Previously reported split PE versions provide a size reduction, but they require intricate engineering and potentially compromise editing efficiency.Results Herein, we present a simplified split PE named as CC-PE, created through non-covalent recruitment of reverse transcriptase to the Cas9 nickase via coiled-coil heterodimers, which are widely used in protein design due to their modularity and well-understood sequence-structure relationship. We demonstrate that the CC-PE maintains or even surpasses the efficiency of unsplit PE in installing intended edits, with no increase in the levels of undesired byproducts within tested loci amongst a variety of cell types (HEK293T, A549, HCT116, and U2OS). Furthermore, coiled-coil heterodimers are used to engineer SpCas9-NG-PE and SpRY-PE, two Cas9 variants with more flexible editing scope. Similarly, the resulting NG-CC-PE and SpRY-CC-PE also achieve equivalent or enhanced efficiency of precise editing compared to the intact PE. When the dual AAV vectors carrying CC-PE are delivered into mice to target the Pcsk9 gene in the liver, CC-PE enables highly efficient precise editing, resulting in a significant reduction of plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and total cholesterol.Conclusions Our innovative, modular system enhances flexibility, thus potentially facilitating the in vivo applicability of prime editing.
BackgroundMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression. Perturbations in plasma miRNA levels are known to impact disease risk and have potential as disease biomarkers. Exploring the genetic regulation of miRNAs may yield new insights into their important role in governing gene expression and disease mechanisms.ResultsWe present genome-wide association studies of 2083 plasma circulating miRNAs in 2178 participants of the Rotterdam Study to identify miRNA-expression quantitative trait loci (miR-eQTLs). We identify 3292 associations between 1289 SNPs and 63 miRNAs, of which 65% are replicated in two independent cohorts. We demonstrate that plasma miR-eQTLs co-localise with gene expression, protein, and metabolite-QTLs, which help in identifying miRNA-regulated pathways. We investigate consequences of alteration in circulating miRNA levels on a wide range of clinical conditions in phenome-wide association studies and Mendelian randomisation using the UK Biobank data (N = 423,419), revealing the pleiotropic and causal effects of several miRNAs on various clinical conditions. In the Mendelian randomisation analysis, we find a protective causal effect of miR-1908-5p on the risk of benign colon neoplasm and show that this effect is independent of its host gene (FADS1).ConclusionsThis study enriches our understanding of the genetic architecture of plasma miRNAs and explores the signatures of miRNAs across a wide range of clinical conditions. The integration of population-based genomics, other omics layers, and clinical data presents opportunities to unravel potential clinical significance of miRNAs and provides tools for novel miRNA-based therapeutic target discovery.
Bulk DNA sequencing of multiple samples from the same tumor is becoming common, yet most methods to infer copy-number aberrations (CNAs) from this data analyze individual samples independently. We introduce HATCHet2, an algorithm to identify haplotype- and clone-specific CNAs simultaneously from multiple bulk samples. HATCHet2 extends the earlier HATCHet method by improving identification of focal CNAs and introducing a novel statistic, the minor haplotype B-allele frequency (mhBAF), that enables identification of mirrored-subclonal CNAs. We demonstrate HATCHet2's improved accuracy using simulations and a single-cell sequencing dataset. HATCHet2 analysis of 10 prostate cancer patients reveals previously unreported mirrored-subclonal CNAs affecting cancer genes.
Background: N6-methyladenosine (m6A), the most abundant internal modification on eukaryotic mRNA, and N6, 2 '-O-dimethyladenosine (m6Am), are epitranscriptomic marks that function in multiple aspects of posttranscriptional regulation. Fat mass and obesity-associated protein (FTO) can remove both m(6)A and m6Am; however, little is known about how FTO achieves its substrate selectivity. Results: Here, we demonstrate that ZBTB48, a C2H2-zinc finger protein that functions in telomere maintenance, associates with FTO and binds both mRNA and the telomere-associated regulatory RNA TERRA to regulate the functional interactions of FTO with target transcripts. Specifically, depletion of ZBTB48 affects targeting of FTO to sites of m6A/m6Am modification, changes cellular m6A/m6Am levels and, consequently, alters decay rates of target RNAs. ZBTB48 ablation also accelerates growth of HCT-116 colorectal cancer cells and modulates FTO-dependent regulation of Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) transcripts by controlling the binding to MTA1 mRNA of the m6A reader IGF2BP2. Conclusions: Our findings thus uncover a previously unknown mechanism of posttranscriptional regulation in which ZBTB48 co-ordinates RNA-binding of the m6A/m6Am demethylase FTO to control expression of its target RNAs.
Background Cellular iron homeostasis is regulated by iron regulatory proteins (IRP1 and IRP2) that sense iron levels (and other metabolic cues) and modulate mRNA translation or stability via interaction with iron regulatory elements (IREs). IRP2 is viewed as the primary regulator in the liver, yet our previous datasets showing diurnal rhythms for certain IRE-containing mRNAs suggest a nuanced temporal control mechanism. The purpose of this study is to gain insights into the daily regulatory dynamics across IRE-bearing mRNAs, specific IRP involvement, and underlying systemic and cellular rhythmicity cues in mouse liver.Results We uncover high-amplitude diurnal oscillations in the regulation of key IRE-containing transcripts in the liver, compatible with maximal IRP activity at the onset of the dark phase. Although IRP2 protein levels also exhibit some diurnal variations and peak at the light-dark transition, ribosome profiling in IRP2-deficient mice reveals that maximal repression of target mRNAs at this timepoint still occurs. We further find that diurnal regulation of IRE-containing mRNAs can continue in the absence of a functional circadian clock as long as feeding is rhythmic.Conclusions Our findings suggest temporally controlled redundancy in IRP activities, with IRP2 mediating regulation of IRE-containing transcripts in the light phase and redundancy, conceivably with IRP1, at dark onset. Moreover, we highlight the significance of feeding-associated signals in driving rhythmicity. Our work highlights the dynamic nature and regulatory complexity in a metabolic pathway that had previously been considered well-understood.
The exponential increase in sequencing data calls for conceptual and computational advances to extract useful biological insights. One such advance, minimizers, allows for reducing the quantity of data handled while maintaining some of its key properties. We provide a basic introduction to minimizers, cover recent methodological developments, and review the diverse applications of minimizers to analyze genomic data, including de novo genome assembly, metagenomics, read alignment, read correction, and pangenomes. We also touch on alternative data sketching techniques including universal hitting sets, syncmers, or strobemers. Minimizers and their alternatives have rapidly become indispensable tools for handling vast amounts of data.
BackgroundThe massive structural variations and frequent introgression highly contribute to the genetic diversity of wheat, while the huge and complex genome of polyploid wheat hinders efficient genotyping of abundant varieties towards accurate identification, management, and exploitation of germplasm resources.ResultsWe develop a novel workflow that identifies 1240 high-quality large copy number variation blocks (CNVb) in wheat at the pan-genome level, demonstrating that CNVb can serve as an ideal DNA fingerprinting marker for discriminating massive varieties, with the accuracy validated by PCR assay. We then construct a digitalized genotyping CNVb map across 1599 global wheat accessions. Key CNVb markers are linked with trait-associated introgressions, such as the 1RS<middle dot>1BL translocation and 2NvS translocation, and the beneficial alleles, such as the end-use quality allele Glu-D1d (Dx5 + Dy10) and the semi-dwarf r-e-z allele. Furthermore, we demonstrate that these tagged CNVb markers promote a stable and cost-effective strategy for evaluating wheat germplasm resources with ultra-low-coverage sequencing data, competing with SNP array for applications such as evaluating new varieties, efficient management of collections in gene banks, and describing wheat germplasm resources in a digitalized manner. We also develop a user-friendly interactive platform, WheatCNVb (http://wheat.cau.edu.cn/WheatCNVb/), for exploring the CNVb profiles over ever-increasing wheat accessions, and also propose a QR-code-like representation of individual digital CNVb fingerprint. This platform also allows uploading new CNVb profiles for comparison with stored varieties.ConclusionsThe CNVb-based approach provides a low-cost and high-throughput genotyping strategy for enabling digitalized wheat germplasm management and modern breeding with precise and practical decision-making.
Tumours exhibit high genotypic and transcriptional heterogeneity. Both affect cancer progression and treatment, but have been predominantly studied separately in follicular lymphoma. To comprehensively investigate the evolution and genotype-to-phenotype maps in follicular lymphoma, we introduce CaClust, a probabilistic graphical model integrating deep whole exome, single-cell RNA and B-cell receptor sequencing data to infer clone genotypes, cell-to-clone mapping, and single-cell genotyping. CaClust outperforms a state-of-the-art model on simulated and patient data. In-depth analyses of single cells from four samples showcase effects of driver mutations, follicular lymphoma evolution, possible therapeutic targets, and single-cell genotyping that agrees with an independent targeted resequencing experiment.
BackgroundThe gut microbiota controls broad aspects of human metabolism and feeding behavior, but the basis for this control remains largely unclear. Given the key role of human dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) in host metabolism, we investigate whether microbiota DPP4-like counterparts perform the same function.ResultsWe identify novel functional homologs of human DPP4 in several bacterial species inhabiting the human gut, and specific associations between Parabacteroides and Porphyromonas DPP4-like genes and type 2 diabetes (T2D). We also find that the DPP4-like enzyme from the gut symbiont Parabacteroides merdae mimics the proteolytic activity of the human enzyme on peptide YY, neuropeptide Y, gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) hormones in vitro. Importantly, administration of E. coli overexpressing the P. merdae DPP4-like enzyme to lipopolysaccharide-treated mice with impaired gut barrier function reduces active GIP and GLP-1 levels, which is attributed to increased DPP4 activity in the portal circulation and the cecal content. Finally, we observe that linagliptin, saxagliptin, sitagliptin, and vildagliptin, antidiabetic drugs with DPP4 inhibitory activity, differentially inhibit the activity of the DPP4-like enzyme from P. merdae.ConclusionsOur findings confirm that proteolytic enzymes produced by the gut microbiota are likely to contribute to the glucose metabolic dysfunction that underlies T2D by inactivating incretins, which might inspire the development of improved antidiabetic therapies.
Single-cell DNA sequencing (scDNA-seq) enables decoding somatic cancer variation. Existing methods are hampered by low throughput or cannot be combined with transcriptome sequencing in the same cell. We propose HIPSD&R-seq (HIgh-throughPut Single-cell Dna and Rna-seq), a scalable yet simple and accessible assay to profile low-coverage DNA and RNA in thousands of cells in parallel. Our approach builds on a modification of the 10X Genomics platform for scATAC and multiome profiling. In applications to human cell models and primary tissue, we demonstrate the feasibility to detect rare clones and we combine the assay with combinatorial indexing to profile over 17,000 cells.
In research involving data-rich assays, exploratory data analysis is a crucial step. Typically, this involves jumping back and forth between visualizations that provide overview of the whole data and others that dive into details. For example, it might be helpful to have one chart showing a summary statistic for all samples, while a second chart provides details for points selected in the first chart. We present R/LinkedCharts, a framework that renders this task radically simple, requiring very few lines of code to obtain complex and general visualization, which later can be polished to provide interactive data access of publication quality.
BackgroundCentromeres are essential for faithful chromosome segregation during mitosis and meiosis. However, the organization of satellite DNA and chromatin at mouse centromeres and pericentromeres is poorly understood due to the challenges of assembling repetitive genomic regions.ResultsUsing recently available PacBio long-read sequencing data from the C57BL/6 strain, we find that contrary to the previous reports of their homogeneous nature, both centromeric minor satellites and pericentromeric major satellites exhibit a high degree of variation in sequence and organization within and between arrays. While most arrays are continuous, a significant fraction is interspersed with non-satellite sequences, including transposable elements. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq), we find that the occupancy of CENP-A and H3K9me3 chromatin at centromeric and pericentric regions, respectively, is associated with increased sequence enrichment and homogeneity at these regions. The transposable elements at centromeric regions are not part of functional centromeres as they lack significant CENP-A enrichment. Furthermore, both CENP-A and H3K9me3 nucleosomes occupy minor and major satellites spanning centromeric-pericentric junctions and a low yet significant amount of CENP-A spreads locally at centromere junctions on both pericentric and telocentric sides. Finally, while H3K9me3 nucleosomes display a well-phased organization on major satellite arrays, CENP-A nucleosomes on minor satellite arrays are poorly phased. Interestingly, the homogeneous class of major satellites also phase CENP-A and H3K27me3 nucleosomes, indicating that the nucleosome phasing is an inherent property of homogeneous major satellites.ConclusionsOur findings reveal that mouse centromeres and pericentromeres display a high diversity in satellite sequence, organization, and chromatin structure.
BackgroundPervasive translation is a widespread phenomenon that plays a critical role in the emergence of novel microproteins, but the diversity of translation patterns contributing to their generation remains unclear. Based on 54 ribosome profiling (Ribo-Seq) datasets, we investigated the yeast Ribo-Seq landscape using a representation framework that allows the comprehensive inventory and classification of the entire diversity of Ribo-Seq signals, including non-canonical ones.ResultsWe show that if coding regions occupy specific areas of the Ribo-Seq landscape, noncoding regions encompass a wide diversity of Ribo-Seq signals and, conversely, populate the entire landscape. Our results show that pervasive translation can, nevertheless, be associated with high specificity, with 1055 noncoding ORFs exhibiting canonical Ribo-Seq signals. Using mass spectrometry under standard conditions or proteasome inhibition with an in-house analysis protocol, we report 239 microproteins originating from noncoding ORFs that display canonical but also non-canonical Ribo-Seq signals. Each condition yields dozens of additional microprotein candidates with comparable translation properties, suggesting a larger population of volatile microproteins that are challenging to detect. Our findings suggest that non-canonical translation signals may harbor valuable information and underscore the significance of considering them in proteogenomic studies. Finally, we show that the translation outcome of a noncoding ORF is primarily determined by the initiating codon and the codon distribution in its two alternative frames, rather than features indicative of functionality.ConclusionOur results enable us to propose a topology of a species' Ribo-Seq landscape, opening the way to comparative analyses of this translation landscape under different conditions.
BackgroundCurrent evidence suggests that cis-regulatory elements controlling gene expression may be the predominant target of natural selection in humans and other species. Detecting selection acting on these elements is critical to understanding evolution but remains challenging because we do not know which mutations will affect gene regulation.ResultsTo address this, we devise an approach to search for lineage-specific selection on three critical steps in transcriptional regulation: chromatin activity, transcription factor binding, and chromosomal looping. Applying this approach to lymphoblastoid cells from 831 individuals of either European or African descent, we find strong signals of differential chromatin activity linked to gene expression differences between ancestries in numerous contexts, but no evidence of functional differences in chromosomal looping. Moreover, we show that enhancers rather than promoters display the strongest signs of selection associated with sites of differential transcription factor binding.ConclusionsOverall, our study indicates that some cis-regulatory adaptation may be more easily detected at the level of chromatin than DNA sequence. This work provides a vast resource of genomic interaction data from diverse human populations and establishes a novel selection test that will benefit future study of regulatory evolution in humans and other species.
Nucleotide conversion RNA sequencing techniques interrogate chemical RNA modifications in cellular transcripts, resulting in mismatch-containing reads. Biases in mapping the resulting reads to reference genomes remain poorly understood. We present splice_sim, a splice-aware RNA-seq simulation and evaluation pipeline that introduces user-defined nucleotide conversions at set frequencies, creates mixture models of converted and unconverted reads, and calculates mapping accuracies per genomic annotation. By simulating nucleotide conversion RNA-seq datasets under realistic experimental conditions, including metabolic RNA labeling and RNA bisulfite sequencing, we measure mapping accuracies of state-of-the-art spliced-read mappers for mouse and human transcripts and derive strategies to prevent biases in the data interpretation.
While context-type-specific regulation of genes is largely determined by cis-regulatory regions, attempts to identify cell type-specific eQTLs are complicated by the nested nature of cell types. We present hierarchical eQTL (H-eQTL), a network-based model for hierarchical annotation of bulk-derived eQTLs to levels of a cell type tree using single-cell chromatin accessibility data and no clustering of cells into discrete cell types. Using our model, we annotate bulk-derived eQTLs from the developing brain with high specificity to levels of a cell type hierarchy, which allows sensitive detection of genes with multiple distinct non-coding elements regulating their expression in different cell types.
BackgroundPervasive usage of alternative promoters leads to the deregulation of gene expression in carcinogenesis and may drive the emergence of new genes in spermatogenesis. However, little is known regarding the mechanisms underpinning the activation of alternative promoters.ResultsHere we describe how alternative cancer-testis-specific transcription is activated. We show that intergenic and intronic CTCF binding sites, which are transcriptionally inert in normal somatic cells, could be epigenetically reprogrammed into active de novo promoters in germ and cancer cells. BORIS/CTCFL, the testis-specific paralog of the ubiquitously expressed CTCF, triggers the epigenetic reprogramming of CTCF sites into units of active transcription. BORIS binding initiates the recruitment of the chromatin remodeling factor, SRCAP, followed by the replacement of H2A histone with H2A.Z, resulting in a more relaxed chromatin state in the nucleosomes flanking the CTCF binding sites. The relaxation of chromatin around CTCF binding sites facilitates the recruitment of multiple additional transcription factors, thereby activating transcription from a given binding site. We demonstrate that the epigenetically reprogrammed CTCF binding sites can drive the expression of cancer-testis genes, long noncoding RNAs, retro-pseudogenes, and dormant transposable elements.ConclusionsThus, BORIS functions as a transcription factor that epigenetically reprograms clustered CTCF binding sites into transcriptional start sites, promoting transcription from alternative promoters in both germ cells and cancer cells.
BackgroundThe development of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has enabled scientists to catalog and probe the transcriptional heterogeneity of individual cells in unprecedented detail. A common step in the analysis of scRNA-seq data is the selection of so-called marker genes, most commonly to enable annotation of the biological cell types present in the sample. In this paper, we benchmark 59 computational methods for selecting marker genes in scRNA-seq data.ResultsWe compare the performance of the methods using 14 real scRNA-seq datasets and over 170 additional simulated datasets. Methods are compared on their ability to recover simulated and expert-annotated marker genes, the predictive performance and characteristics of the gene sets they select, their memory usage and speed, and their implementation quality. In addition, various case studies are used to scrutinize the most commonly used methods, highlighting issues and inconsistencies.ConclusionsOverall, we present a comprehensive evaluation of methods for selecting marker genes in scRNA-seq data. Our results highlight the efficacy of simple methods, especially the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, Student's t-test, and logistic regression.
Background Interactions among cis-regulatory elements (CREs) play a crucial role in gene regulation. Various approaches have been developed to map these interactions genome-wide, including those relying on interindividual epigenomic variation to identify groups of covariable regulatory elements, referred to as chromatin modules (CMs). While CM mapping allows to investigate the relationship between chromatin modularity and gene expression, the computational principles used for CM identification vary in their application and outcomes. Results We comprehensively evaluate and streamline existing CM mapping tools and present guidelines for optimal utilization of epigenome data from a diverse population of individuals to assess regulatory coordination across the human genome. We showcase the effectiveness of our recommended practices by analyzing distinct cell types and demonstrate cell type specificity of CRE interactions in CMs and their relevance for gene expression. Integration of genotype information revealed that many non-coding disease-associated variants affect the activity of CMs in a cell type-specific manner by affecting the binding of cell type-specific transcription factors. We provide example cases that illustrate in detail how CMs can be used to deconstruct GWAS loci, assess variable expression of cell surface receptors in immune cells, and reveal how genetic variation can impact the expression of prognostic markers in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Conclusions Our study presents an optimal strategy for CM mapping and reveals how CMs capture the coordination of CREs and its impact on gene expression. Non-coding genetic variants can disrupt this coordination, and we highlight how this may lead to disease predisposition in a cell type-specific manner.
BackgroundIn vertebrates, most protein-coding genes have a peak of GC-content near their 5 ' transcriptional start site (TSS). This feature promotes both the efficient nuclear export and translation of mRNAs. Despite the importance of GC-content for RNA metabolism, its general features, origin, and maintenance remain mysterious. We investigate the evolutionary forces shaping GC-content at the transcriptional start site (TSS) of genes through both comparative genomic analysis of nucleotide substitution rates between different species and by examining human de novo mutations.ResultsOur data suggests that GC-peaks at TSSs were present in the last common ancestor of amniotes, and likely that of vertebrates. We observe that in apes and rodents, where recombination is directed away from TSSs by PRDM9, GC-content at the 5 ' end of protein-coding gene is currently undergoing mutational decay. In canids, which lack PRDM9 and perform recombination at TSSs, GC-content at the 5 ' end of protein-coding is increasing. We show that these patterns extend into the 5 ' end of the open reading frame, thus impacting synonymous codon position choices.ConclusionsOur results indicate that the dynamics of this GC-peak in amniotes is largely shaped by historic patterns of recombination. Since decay of GC-content towards the mutation rate equilibrium is the default state for non-functional DNA, the observed decrease in GC-content at TSSs in apes and rodents indicates that the GC-peak is not being maintained by selection on most protein-coding genes in those species.
BackgroundThe Italic Iron Age is characterized by the presence of various ethnic groups partially examined from a genomic perspective. To explore the evolution of Iron Age Italic populations and the genetic impact of Romanization, we focus on the Picenes, one of the most fascinating pre-Roman civilizations, who flourished on the Middle Adriatic side of Central Italy between the 9th and the 3rd century BCE, until the Roman colonization.ResultsMore than 50 samples are reported, spanning more than 1000 years of history from the Iron Age to Late Antiquity. Despite cultural diversity, our analysis reveals no major differences between the Picenes and other coeval populations, suggesting a shared genetic history of the Central Italian Iron Age ethnic groups. Nevertheless, a slight genetic differentiation between populations along the Adriatic and Tyrrhenian coasts can be observed, possibly due to different population dynamics in the two sides of Italy and/or genetic contacts across the Adriatic Sea. Additionally, we identify several individuals with ancestries deviating from their general population. Lastly, in our Late Antiquity site, we observe a drastic change in the genetic landscape of the Middle Adriatic region, indicating a relevant influx from the Near East, possibly as a consequence of Romanization.ConclusionsOur findings, consistently with archeological hypotheses, suggest genetic interactions across the Adriatic Sea during the Bronze/Iron Age and a high level of individual mobility typical of cosmopolitan societies. Finally, we highlight the role of the Roman Empire in shaping genetic and phenotypic changes that greatly impact the Italian peninsula.
BackgroundRecent studies uncovered pervasive transcription and translation of thousands of noncanonical open reading frames (nORFs) outside of annotated genes. The contribution of nORFs to cellular phenotypes is difficult to infer using conventional approaches because nORFs tend to be short, of recent de novo origins, and lowly expressed. Here we develop a dedicated coexpression analysis framework that accounts for low expression to investigate the transcriptional regulation, evolution, and potential cellular roles of nORFs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.ResultsOur results reveal that nORFs tend to be preferentially coexpressed with genes involved in cellular transport or homeostasis but rarely with genes involved in RNA processing. Mechanistically, we discover that young de novo nORFs located downstream of conserved genes tend to leverage their neighbors' promoters through transcription readthrough, resulting in high coexpression and high expression levels. Transcriptional piggybacking also influences the coexpression profiles of young de novo nORFs located upstream of genes, but to a lesser extent and without detectable impact on expression levels. Transcriptional piggybacking influences, but does not determine, the transcription profiles of de novo nORFs emerging nearby genes. About 40% of nORFs are not strongly coexpressed with any gene but are transcriptionally regulated nonetheless and tend to form entirely new transcription modules. We offer a web browser interface (https://carvunislab.csb.pitt.edu/shiny/coexpression/) to efficiently query, visualize, and download our coexpression inferences.ConclusionsOur results suggest that nORF transcription is highly regulated. Our coexpression dataset serves as an unprecedented resource for unraveling how nORFs integrate into cellular networks, contribute to cellular phenotypes, and evolve.
Background DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification which has numerous roles in modulating genome function. Its levels are spatially correlated across the genome, typically high in repressed regions but low in transcription factor (TF) binding sites and active regulatory regions. However, the mechanisms establishing genome-wide and TF binding site methylation patterns are still unclear.Results Here we use a comparative approach to investigate the association of DNA methylation to TF binding evolution in mammals. Specifically, we experimentally profile DNA methylation and combine this with published occupancy profiles of five distinct TFs (CTCF, CEBPA, HNF4A, ONECUT1, FOXA1) in the liver of five mammalian species (human, macaque, mouse, rat, dog). TF binding sites are lowly methylated, but they often also have intermediate methylation levels. Furthermore, biding sites are influenced by the methylation status of CpGs in their wider binding regions even when CpGs are absent from the core binding motif. Employing a classification and clustering approach, we extract distinct and species-conserved patterns of DNA methylation levels at TF binding regions. CEBPA, HNF4A, ONECUT1, and FOXA1 share the same methylation patterns, while CTCF's differ. These patterns characterize alternative functions and chromatin landscapes of TF-bound regions. Leveraging our phylogenetic framework, we find DNA methylation gain upon evolutionary loss of TF occupancy, indicating coordinated evolution. Furthermore, each methylation pattern has its own evolutionary trajectory reflecting its genomic contexts.Conclusions Our epigenomic analyses indicate a role for DNA methylation in TF binding changes across species including that specific DNA methylation profiles characterize TF binding and are associated with their regulatory activity, chromatin contexts, and evolutionary trajectories.
Background DNA replication progression can be affected by the presence of physical barriers like the RNA polymerases, leading to replication stress and DNA damage. Nonetheless, we do not know how transcription influences overall DNA replication progression.Results To characterize sites where DNA replication forks stall and pause, we establish a genome-wide approach to identify them. This approach uses multiple timepoints during S-phase to identify replication fork/stalling hotspots as replication progresses through the genome. These sites are typically associated with increased DNA damage, overlapped with fragile sites and with breakpoints of rearrangements identified in cancers but do not overlap with replication origins. Overlaying these sites with a genome-wide analysis of RNA polymerase II transcription, we find that replication fork stalling/pausing sites inside genes are directly related to transcription progression and activity. Indeed, we find that slowing down transcription elongation slows down directly replication progression through genes. This indicates that transcription and replication can coexist over the same regions. Importantly, rearrangements found in cancers overlapping transcription-replication collision sites are detected in non-transformed cells and increase following treatment with ATM and ATR inhibitors. At the same time, we find instances where transcription activity favors replication progression because it reduces histone density.Conclusions Altogether, our findings highlight how transcription and replication overlap during S-phase, with both positive and negative consequences for replication fork progression and genome stability by the coexistence of these two processes.
Background Further advancement of genome editing highly depends on the development of tools with higher compatibility with eukaryotes. A multitude of described Cas9s have great potential but require optimization for genome editing purposes. Among these, the Cas9 from Campylobacter jejuni, CjCas9, has a favorable small size, facilitating delivery in mammalian cells. Nonetheless, its full exploitation is limited by its poor editing activity.Results Here, we develop a Eukaryotic Platform to Improve Cas Activity (EPICA) to steer weakly active Cas9 nucleases into highly active enzymes by directed evolution. The EPICA platform is obtained by coupling Cas nuclease activity with yeast auxotrophic selection followed by mammalian cell selection through a sensitive reporter system. EPICA is validated with CjCas9, generating an enhanced variant, UltraCjCas9, following directed evolution rounds. UltraCjCas9 is up to 12-fold more active in mammalian endogenous genomic loci, while preserving high genome-wide specificity.Conclusions We report a eukaryotic pipeline allowing enhancement of Cas9 systems, setting the ground to unlock the multitude of RNA-guided nucleases existing in nature.
BackgroundLong-read technologies from Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) and Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) have transformed genomics research by providing diverse data types like HiFi, Duplex, and ultra-long ONT. Despite recent strides in achieving haplotype-phased gapless genome assemblies using long-read technologies, concerns persist regarding the representation of genetic diversity, prompting the development of pangenome references. However, pangenome studies face challenges related to data types, volumes, and cost considerations for each assembled genome, while striving to maintain sensitivity. The absence of comprehensive guidance on optimal data selection exacerbates these challenges.ResultsOur study evaluates recommended data types and volumes required to establish a robust de novo genome assembly pipeline for population-level pangenome projects, extensively examining performance between ONT's Duplex and PacBio HiFi datasets in the context of achieving high-quality phased genomes with enhanced contiguity and completeness. The results show that achieving chromosome-level haplotype-resolved assembly requires 20 x high-quality long reads such as PacBio HiFi or ONT Duplex, combined with 15-20 x of ultra-long ONT per haplotype and 10 x of long-range data such as Omni-C or Hi-C. High-quality long reads from both platforms yield assemblies with comparable contiguity, with HiFi excelling in phasing accuracies, while Duplex generates more T2T contigs.ConclusionOur study provides insights into optimal data types and volumes for robust de novo genome assembly in population-level pangenome projects. Reassessing the recommended data types and volumes in this study and aligning them with practical economic limitations are vital to the pangenome research community, contributing to their efforts and pushing genomic studies with broader impacts.
Many datasets are being produced by consortia that seek to characterize healthy and disease tissues at single-cell resolution. While biospecimen and experimental information is often captured, detailed metadata standards related to data matrices and analysis workflows are currently lacking. To address this, we develop the matrix and analysis metadata standards (MAMS) to serve as a resource for data centers, repositories, and tool developers. We define metadata fields for matrices and parameters commonly utilized in analytical workflows and developed the rmams package to extract MAMS from single-cell objects. Overall, MAMS promotes the harmonization, integration, and reproducibility of single-cell data across platforms.
Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are frequently documented RNA modification substrates. Nanopore Technologies enables the direct sequencing of RNAs and the detection of modified nucleobases. Ordinarily, direct RNA sequencing uses polyadenylation selection, studying primarily mRNA gene expression. Here, we present NERD-seq, which enables detection of multiple non-coding RNAs, excluded by the standard approach, alongside natively polyadenylated transcripts. Using neural tissues as a proof of principle, we show that NERD-seq expands representation of frequently modified non-coding RNAs, such as snoRNAs, snRNAs, scRNAs, srpRNAs, tRNAs, and rRFs. NERD-seq represents an RNA-seq approach to simultaneously study mRNA and ncRNA epitranscriptomes in brain tissues and beyond.
BackgroundThe design of nucleotide sequences with defined properties is a long-standing problem in bioengineering. An important application is protein expression, be it in the context of research or the production of mRNA vaccines. The rate of protein synthesis depends on the 5 ' untranslated region (5 ' UTR) of the mRNAs, and recently, deep learning models were proposed to predict the translation output of mRNAs from the 5 ' UTR sequence. At the same time, large data sets of endogenous and reporter mRNA translation have become available.ResultsIn this study, we use complementary data obtained in two different cell types to assess the accuracy and generality of currently available models for predicting translational output. We find that while performing well on the data sets on which they were trained, deep learning models do not generalize well to other data sets, in particular of endogenous mRNAs, which differ in many properties from reporter constructs.ConclusionsThese differences limit the ability of deep learning models to uncover mechanisms of translation control and to predict the impact of genetic variation. We suggest directions that combine high-throughput measurements and machine learning to unravel mechanisms of translation control and improve construct design.
Background :During aging, the human methylome undergoes both differential and variable shifts, accompanied by increased entropy. The distinction between variably methylated positions (VMPs) and differentially methylated positions (DMPs), their contribution to epigenetic age, and the role of cell type heterogeneity remain unclear. Results: We conduct a comprehensive analysis of > 32,000 human blood methylomes from 56 datasets (age range = 6-101 years). We find a significant proportion of the blood methylome that is differentially methylated with age (48% DMPs; FDR < 0.005) and variably methylated with age (37% VMPs; FDR < 0.005), with considerable overlap between the two groups (59% of DMPs are VMPs). Bivalent and Polycomb regions become increasingly methylated and divergent between individuals, while quiescent regions lose methylation more uniformly. Both chronological and biological clocks, but not pace-of-aging clocks, show a strong enrichment for CpGs undergoing both mean and variance changes during aging. The accumulation of DMPs shifting towards a methylation fraction of 50% drives the increase in entropy, smoothening the epigenetic landscape. However, approximately a quarter of DMPs exhibit anti-entropic effects, opposing this direction of change. While changes in cell type composition minimally affect DMPs, VMPs and entropy measurements are moderately sensitive to such alterations. Conclusion: This study represents the largest investigation to date of genome-wide DNA methylation changes and aging in a single tissue, providing valuable insights into primary molecular changes relevant to chronological and biological aging.
Background: North African human populations present a complex demographic scenario due to the presence of an autochthonous genetic component and population substructure, plus extensive gene flow from the Middle East, Europe, and sub-Saharan Africa. Results: We conducted a comprehensive analysis of 364 genomes to construct detailed demographic models for the North African region, encompassing its two primary ethnic groups, the Arab and Amazigh populations. This was achieved through an Approximate Bayesian Computation with Deep Learning (ABC-DL) framework and a novel algorithm called Genetic Programming for Population Genetics (GP4PG). This innovative approach enabled us to effectively model intricate demographic scenarios, utilizing a subset of 16 whole genomes at > 30X coverage. The demographic model suggested by GP4PG exhibited a closer alignment with the observed data compared to the ABC-DL model. Both point to a back-to-Africa origin of North African individuals and a close relationship with Eurasian populations. Results support different origins for Amazigh and Arab populations, with Amazigh populations originating back in Epipaleolithic times, while GP4PG supports Arabization as the main source of Middle Eastern ancestry. The GP4PG model includes population substructure in surrounding populations (sub-Saharan Africa and Middle East) with continuous decaying gene flow after population split. Contrary to ABC-DL, the best GP4PG model does not require pulses of admixture from surrounding populations into North Africa pointing to soft splits as drivers of divergence in North Africa. Conclusions: We have built a demographic model on North Africa that points to a back-to-Africa expansion and a differential origin between Arab and Amazigh populations.
BackgroundN6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most abundant mRNA modification, and controls mRNA stability. m6A distribution varies considerably between and within species. Yet, it is unclear to what extent this variability is driven by changes in genetic sequences ('cis') or cellular environments ('trans') and via which mechanisms.ResultsHere we dissect the determinants governing RNA methylation via interspecies and intraspecies hybrids in yeast and mammalian systems, coupled with massively parallel reporter assays and m6A-QTL reanalysis. We find that m6A evolution and variability is driven primarily in 'cis', via two mechanisms: (1) variations altering m6A consensus motifs, and (2) variation impacting mRNA secondary structure. We establish that mutations impacting RNA structure - even when distant from an m6A consensus motif - causally dictate methylation propensity. Finally, we demonstrate that allele-specific differences in m6A levels lead to allele-specific changes in gene expression.ConclusionsOur findings define the determinants governing m6A evolution and diversity and characterize the consequences thereof on gene expression regulation.
Background Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the most common causes of heart failure. Multiple identified mutations in nexilin (NEXN) have been suggested to be linked with severe DCM. However, the exact association between multiple mutations of Nexn and DCM remains unclear. Moreover, it is critical for the development of precise and effective therapeutics in treatments of DCM.Results In our study, Nexn global knockout mice and mice carrying human equivalent G645del mutation are studied using functional gene rescue assays. AAV-mediated gene delivery is conducted through systemic intravenous injections at the neonatal stage. Heart tissues are analyzed by immunoblots, and functions are assessed by echocardiography. Here, we identify functional components of Nexilin and demonstrate that exogenous introduction could rescue the cardiac function and extend the lifespan of Nexn knockout mouse models. Similar therapeutic effects are also obtained in G645del mice, providing a promising intervention for future clinical therapeutics.Conclusions In summary, we demonstrated that a single injection of AAV-Nexn was capable to restore the functions of cardiomyocytes and extended the lifespan of Nexn knockout and G645del mice. Our study represented a long-term gene replacement therapy for DCM that potentially covers all forms of loss-of-function mutations in NEXN.
Topologically associating domains (TADs) are essential units of genome architecture, influencing transcriptional regulation and diseases. Despite numerous methods proposed for TAD identification, it remains challenging due to complex background and nested TAD structures. We introduce HTAD, a human-in-the-loop TAD caller that combines machine learning with human supervision to achieve high accuracy. HTAD begins with feature extraction for potential TAD border pairs, followed by an interactive labeling process through active learning. Performance assessments using public curation and synthetic datasets demonstrate HTAD's superiority over other state-of-the-art methods and reveal highly hierarchical TAD structures, offering a human-in-the-loop solution for detecting complex genomic patterns.
Background: Methylation of histone 3 lysine 36 (H3K36me) has emerged as an essential epigenetic component for the faithful regulation of gene expression. Despite its importance in development and disease, how the molecular agents collectively shape the H3K36me landscape is unclear. Results: We use mouse mesenchymal stem cells to perturb the H3K36me methyltransferases (K36MTs) and infer the activities of the five most prominent enzymes: SETD2, NSD1, NSD2, NSD3, and ASH1L. We find that H3K36me2 is the most abundant of the three methylation states and is predominantly deposited at intergenic regions by NSD1, and partly by NSD2. In contrast, H3K36me1/3 are most abundant within exons and are positively correlated with gene expression. We demonstrate that while SETD2 deposits most H3K36me3, it may also deposit H3K36me2 within transcribed genes. Additionally, loss of SETD2 results in an increase of exonic H3K36me1, suggesting other (K36MTs) prime gene bodies with lower methylation states ahead of transcription. While NSD1/2 establish broad intergenic H3K36me2 domains, NSD3 deposits H3K36me2 peaks on active promoters and enhancers. Meanwhile, the activity of ASH1L is restricted to the regulatory elements of developmentally relevant genes, and our analyses implicate PBX2 as a potential recruitment factor. Conclusions: Within genes, SETD2 primarily deposits H3K36me3, while the other K36MTs deposit H3K36me1/2 independently of SETD2 activity. For the deposition of H3K36me1/2, we find a hierarchy of K36MT activities where NSD1 > NSD2 > NSD3 > ASH1L. While NSD1 and NSD2 are responsible for most genome-wide propagation of H3K36me2, the activities of NSD3 and ASH1L are confined to active regulatory elements.
BackgroundLong-read sequencing can enable the detection of base modifications, such as CpG methylation, in single molecules of DNA. The most commonly used methods for long-read sequencing are nanopore developed by Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) and single molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing developed by Pacific Bioscience (PacBio). In this study, we systematically compare the performance of CpG methylation detection from long-read sequencing.ResultsWe demonstrate that CpG methylation detection from 7179 nanopore-sequenced DNA samples is highly accurate and consistent with 132 oxidative bisulfite-sequenced (oxBS) samples, isolated from the same blood draws. We introduce quality filters for CpGs that further enhance the accuracy of CpG methylation detection from nanopore-sequenced DNA, while removing at most 30% of CpGs. We evaluate the per-site performance of CpG methylation detection across different genomic features and CpG methylation rates and demonstrate how the latest R10.4 flowcell chemistry and base-calling algorithms improve methylation detection from nanopore sequencing. Additionally, we show how the methylation detection of 50 SMRT-sequenced genomes compares to nanopore sequencing and oxBS.ConclusionsThis study provides the first systematic comparison of CpG methylation detection tools for long-read sequencing methods. We compare two commonly used computational methods for the detection of CpG methylation in a large number of nanopore genomes, including samples sequenced using the latest R10.4 nanopore flowcell chemistry and 50 SMRT sequenced samples. We provide insights into the strengths and limitations of each sequencing method as well as recommendations for standardization and evaluation of tools designed for genome-scale modified base detection using long-read sequencing.
Background: Embryos are regeneration and wound healing masters. They rapidly close wounds and scarlessly remodel and regenerate injured tissue. Regeneration has been extensively studied in many animal models using new tools such as single-cell analysis. However, until now, they have been based primarily on experiments assessing from 1 day post injury. Results: In this paper, we reveal that critical steps initiating regeneration occur within hours after injury. We discovered the regeneration initiating cells (RICs) using single-cell and spatial transcriptomics of the regenerating Xenopus laevis tail. RICs are formed transiently from the basal epidermal cells, and their expression signature suggests they are important for modifying the surrounding extracellular matrix thus regulating development. The absence or deregulation of RICs leads to excessive extracellular matrix deposition and defective regeneration. Conclusion: RICs represent a newly discovered transient cell state involved in the initiation of the regeneration process.
Nanopore sequencing generates noisy electrical signals that need to be converted into a standard string of DNA nucleotide bases using a computational step called basecalling. The performance of basecalling has critical implications for all later steps in genome analysis. Therefore, there is a need to reduce the computation and memory cost of basecalling while maintaining accuracy. We present RUBICON, a framework to develop efficient hardware-optimized basecallers. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RUBICON by developing RUBICALL, the first hardware-optimized mixed-precision basecaller that performs efficient basecalling, outperforming the state-of-the-art basecallers. We believe RUBICON offers a promising path to develop future hardware-optimized basecallers.
Background DNA methylation is an essential epigenetic modification. However, its contribution to trait changes and diversity in the domestication of perennial fruit trees remains unknown.Results Here, we investigate the variation in DNA methylation during pear domestication and improvement using whole-genome bisulfite sequencing in 41 pear accessions. Contrary to the significant decrease during rice domestication, we detect a global increase in DNA methylation during pear domestication and improvement. We find this specific increase in pear is significantly correlated with the downregulation of Demeter-like1 (DML1, encoding DNA demethylase) due to human selection. We identify a total of 5591 differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Methylation in the CG and CHG contexts undergoes co-evolution during pear domestication and improvement. DMRs have higher genetic diversity than selection sweep regions, especially in the introns. Approximately 97% of DMRs are not associated with any SNPs, and these DMRs are associated with starch and sucrose metabolism and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. We also perform correlation analysis between DNA methylation and gene expression. We find genes close to the hypermethylated DMRs that are significantly associated with fruit ripening. We further verify the function of a hyper-DMR-associated gene, CAMTA2, and demonstrate that overexpression of CAMTA2 in tomato and pear callus inhibits fruit ripening.Conclusions Our study describes a specific pattern of DNA methylation in the domestication and improvement of a perennial pear tree and suggests that increased DNA methylation plays an essential role in the early ripening of pear fruits.
Centrifuger is an efficient taxonomic classification method that compares sequencing reads against a microbial genome database. In Centrifuger, the Burrows-Wheeler transformed genome sequences are losslessly compressed using a novel scheme called run-block compression. Run-block compression achieves sublinear space complexity and is effective at compressing diverse microbial databases like RefSeq while supporting fast rank queries. Combining this compression method with other strategies for compacting the Ferragina-Manzini (FM) index, Centrifuger reduces the memory footprint by half compared to other FM-index-based approaches. Furthermore, the lossless compression and the unconstrained match length help Centrifuger achieve greater accuracy than competing methods at lower taxonomic levels.
Single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) is widely used for transcriptome profiling, but most analyses focus on gene-level events, with less attention devoted to alternative splicing. Here, we present scASfind, a novel computational method to allow for quantitative analysis of cell type-specific splicing events using full-length scRNA-seq data. ScASfind utilizes an efficient data structure to store the percent spliced-in value for each splicing event. This makes it possible to exhaustively search for patterns among all differential splicing events, allowing us to identify marker events, mutually exclusive events, and events involving large blocks of exons that are specific to one or more cell types.
BackgroundImmunotherapy has improved survival for patients with advanced clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), but resistance to therapy develops in most patients. We use cellular-resolution spatial transcriptomics in patients with immunotherapy na & iuml;ve and exposed primary ccRCC tumors to better understand immunotherapy resistance.ResultsSpatial molecular imaging of tumor and adjacent stroma samples from 21 tumors suggests that viable tumors following immunotherapy harbor more stromal CD8 + T cells and neutrophils than immunotherapy na & iuml;ve tumors. YES1 is significantly upregulated in immunotherapy exposed tumor cells. Spatial GSEA shows that the epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway is spatially enriched and the associated ligand-receptor transcript pair COL4A1-ITGAV has significantly higher autocorrelation in the stroma after exposure to immunotherapy. More integrin alpha V + cells are observed in immunotherapy exposed stroma on multiplex immunofluorescence validation. Compared to other cancers in TCGA, ccRCC tumors have the highest expression of both COL4A1 and ITGAV. Assessing bulk RNA expression and proteomic correlates in CPTAC databases reveals that collagen IV protein is more abundant in advanced stages of disease.ConclusionsSpatial transcriptomics of samples of 3 patient cohorts with cRCC tumors indicates that COL4A1 and ITGAV are more autocorrelated in immunotherapy-exposed stroma compared to immunotherapy-na & iuml;ve tumors, with high expression among fibroblasts, tumor cells, and endothelium. Further research is needed to understand changes in the ccRCC tumor immune microenvironment and explore potential therapeutic role of integrin after immunotherapy treatment.
BackgroundReproducibility is a major concern in biomedical studies, and existing publication guidelines do not solve the problem. Batch effects and quality imbalances between groups of biological samples are major factors hampering reproducibility. Yet, the latter is rarely considered in the scientific literature.ResultsOur analysis uses 40 clinically relevant RNA-seq datasets to quantify the impact of quality imbalance between groups of samples on the reproducibility of gene expression studies. High-quality imbalance is frequent (14 datasets; 35%), and hundreds of quality markers are present in more than 50% of the datasets. Enrichment analysis suggests common stress-driven effects among the low-quality samples and highlights a complementary role of transcription factors and miRNAs to regulate stress response. Preliminary ChIP-seq results show similar trends. Quality imbalance has an impact on the number of differential genes derived by comparing control to disease samples (the higher the imbalance, the higher the number of genes), on the proportion of quality markers in top differential genes (the higher the imbalance, the higher the proportion; up to 22%) and on the proportion of known disease genes in top differential genes (the higher the imbalance, the lower the proportion). We show that removing outliers based on their quality score improves the resulting downstream analysis.ConclusionsThanks to a stringent selection of well-designed datasets, we demonstrate that quality imbalance between groups of samples can significantly reduce the relevance of differential genes, consequently reducing reproducibility between studies. Appropriate experimental design and analysis methods can substantially reduce the problem.
Background The proliferation antigen Ki-67 has been widely used in clinical settings for cancer staging for many years, but investigations on its biological functions have lagged. Recently, Ki-67 has been shown to regulate both the composition of the chromosome periphery and chromosome behaviour in mitosis as well as to play a role in heterochromatin organisation and gene transcription. However, how the different roles for Ki-67 across the cell cycle are regulated and coordinated remain poorly understood. The progress towards understanding Ki-67 function have been limited by the tools available to deplete the protein, coupled to its abundance and fluctuation during the cell cycle.Results Here, we use a doxycycline-inducible E3 ligase together with an auxin-inducible degron tag to achieve a rapid, acute and homogeneous degradation of Ki-67 in HCT116 cells. This system, coupled with APEX2 proteomics and phospho-proteomics approaches, allows us to show that Ki-67 plays a role during DNA replication. In its absence, DNA replication is severely delayed, the replication machinery is unloaded, causing DNA damage that is not sensed by the canonical pathways and dependent on HUWE1 ligase. This leads to defects in replication and sister chromatids cohesion, but it also triggers an interferon response mediated by the cGAS/STING pathway in all the cell lines tested.Conclusions We unveil a new function of Ki-67 in DNA replication and genome maintenance that is independent of its previously known role in mitosis and gene regulation.
Single-cell atlases pose daunting computational challenges pertaining to the integration of spatial and temporal information and the visualization of trajectories across large atlases. We introduce StaVia, a computational framework that synergizes multi-faceted single-cell data with higher-order random walks that leverage the memory of cells' past states, fused with a cartographic Atlas View that offers intuitive graph visualization. This spatially aware cartography captures relationships between cell populations based on their spatial location as well as their gene expression and developmental stage. We demonstrate this using zebrafish gastrulation data, underscoring its potential to dissect complex biological landscapes in both spatial and temporal contexts.
Background The relationship between human gut microbiota and high-altitude hypoxia acclimatization remains highly controversial. This stems primarily from uncertainties regarding both the potential temporal changes in the microbiota under such conditions and the existence of any dominant or core bacteria that may assist in host acclimatization. Results To address these issues, and to control for variables commonly present in previous studies which significantly impact the results obtained, namely genetic background, ethnicity, lifestyle, and diet, we conducted a 108-day longitudinal study on the same cohort comprising 45 healthy Han adults who traveled from lowland Chongqing, 243 masl, to high-altitude plateau Lhasa, Xizang, 3658 masl, and back. Using shotgun metagenomic profiling, we study temporal changes in gut microbiota composition at different timepoints. The results show a significant reduction in the species and functional diversity of the gut microbiota, along with a marked increase in functional redundancy. These changes are primarily driven by the overgrowth of Blautia A, a genus that is also abundant in six independent Han cohorts with long-term duration in lower hypoxia environment in Shigatse, Xizang, at 4700 masl. Further animal experiments indicate that Blautia A-fed mice exhibit enhanced intestinal health and a better acclimatization phenotype to sustained hypoxic stress. Conclusions Our study underscores the importance of Blautia A species in the gut microbiota's rapid response to high-altitude hypoxia and its potential role in maintaining intestinal health and aiding host adaptation to extreme environments, likely via anti-inflammation and intestinal barrier protection.
BackgroundTransposable elements play a critical role in maintaining genome architecture during neurodevelopment. Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements (SINEs), a major subtype of transposable elements, are known to harbor binding sites for the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and pivotal in orchestrating chromatin organization. However, the regulatory mechanisms controlling the activity of SINEs in the developing brain remains elusive.ResultsIn our study, we conduct a comprehensive genome-wide epigenetic analysis in mouse neural precursor cells using ATAC-seq, ChIP-seq, whole genome bisulfite sequencing, in situ Hi-C, and RNA-seq. Our findings reveal that the SET domain bifurcated histone lysine methyltransferase 1 (SETDB1)-mediated H3K9me3, in conjunction with DNA methylation, restricts chromatin accessibility on a selective subset of SINEs in neural precursor cells. Mechanistically, loss of Setdb1 increases CTCF access to these SINE elements and contributes to chromatin loop reorganization. Moreover, de novo loop formation contributes to differential gene expression, including the dysregulation of genes enriched in mitotic pathways. This leads to the disruptions of cell proliferation in the embryonic brain after genetic ablation of Setdb1 both in vitro and in vivo.ConclusionsIn summary, our study sheds light on the epigenetic regulation of SINEs in mouse neural precursor cells, suggesting their role in maintaining chromatin organization and cell proliferation during neurodevelopment.
BackgroundThe function of diverse ruminal microbes is tightly linked to rumen development and host physiology. The system of ruminal microbes is an excellent model to clarify the fundamental ecological relationships among complex nutrient-microbiome-host interactions. Here, neonatal lambs are introduced to different dietary regimes to investigate the influences of early-life crosstalk between nutrients and microbiome on rumen development.ResultsWe find starchy corn-soybean starter-fed lambs exhibit the thickest ruminal epithelia and fiber-rich alfalfa hay-fed lambs have the thickest rumen muscle. Metabolome and metagenome data reveal that indole-3-carboxaldehyde (3-IAld) and prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) are the top characteristic ruminal metabolites associated with ruminal epithelial and muscular development, which depend on the enhanced ruminal microbial synthesis potential of 3-IAld and PGD2. Moreover, microbial culture experiment first demonstrates that Bifidobacterium pseudolongum is able to convert tryptophan into 3-IAld and Candida albicans is a key producer for PGD2. Transcriptome sequencing of the ruminal epithelia and smooth muscle shows that ruminal epithelial and muscular development is accompanied by Wnt and Ca2+ signaling pathway activation. Primary cell cultures further confirm that 3-IAld promotes ruminal epithelial cell proliferation depending on AhR-wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and PGD2 accelerates ruminal smooth muscle cell proliferation via Ca2+ signaling pathway. Furthermore, we find that 3-IAld and PGD2 infusion promote ruminal epithelial and musculature development in lambs.ConclusionsThis study demonstrates that early-life ruminal microbiome-derived 3-IAld and PGD2 are effective promoters of rumen development, which enhances our understanding of nutrient-microbiome-host interactions in early life.
BackgroundPlasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is derived from cellular death in various tissues. Investigating the tissue origin of cfDNA through cell type deconvolution, we can detect changes in tissue homeostasis that occur during disease progression or in response to treatment. Consequently, cfDNA has emerged as a valuable noninvasive biomarker for disease detection and treatment monitoring. Although there are many methylation-based methods for cfDNA cell type deconvolution, a comprehensive and systematic evaluation of these methods has yet to be conducted.ResultsIn this study, we benchmark five methods: MethAtlas, cfNOMe toolkit, CelFiE, CelFEER, and UXM. Utilizing deep whole-genome bisulfite sequencing data from 35 human cell types, we generate in silico cfDNA samples with ground truth cell type proportions to assess the deconvolution performance of the five methods under multiple scenarios. Our findings indicate that multiple factors, including reference marker selection, sequencing depth, and reference atlas completeness, jointly influence the deconvolution performance. Notably, an incomplete reference with missing markers or cell types leads to suboptimal results. We observe performance differences among methods under varying conditions, underscoring the importance of tailoring cfDNA deconvolution analyses. To increase the clinical relevance of our findings, we further evaluate each method's performance in potential clinical applications using real-world datasets.ConclusionsBased on the benchmark results, we propose general guidelines to choose the suitable methods based on sequencing depth of the cfDNA data and completeness of the reference atlas to maximize the performance of methylation-based cfDNA cell type deconvolution.
BackgroundComputational variant effect predictors offer a scalable and increasingly reliable means of interpreting human genetic variation, but concerns of circularity and bias have limited previous methods for evaluating and comparing predictors. Population-level cohorts of genotyped and phenotyped participants that have not been used in predictor training can facilitate an unbiased benchmarking of available methods. Using a curated set of human gene-trait associations with a reported rare-variant burden association, we evaluate the correlations of 24 computational variant effect predictors with associated human traits in the UK Biobank and All of Us cohorts.ResultsAlphaMissense outperformed all other predictors in inferring human traits based on rare missense variants in UK Biobank and All of Us participants. The overall rankings of computational variant effect predictors in these two cohorts showed a significant positive correlation.ConclusionWe describe a method to assess computational variant effect predictors that sidesteps the limitations of previous evaluations. This approach is generalizable to future predictors and could continue to inform predictor choice for personal and clinical genetics.
BackgroundRNA-seq has brought forth significant discoveries regarding aberrations in RNA processing, implicating these RNA variants in a variety of diseases. Aberrant splicing and single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in RNA have been demonstrated to alter transcript stability, localization, and function. In particular, the upregulation of ADAR, an enzyme that mediates adenosine-to-inosine editing, has been previously linked to an increase in the invasiveness of lung adenocarcinoma cells and associated with splicing regulation. Despite the functional importance of studying splicing and SNVs, the use of short-read RNA-seq has limited the community's ability to interrogate both forms of RNA variation simultaneously.ResultsWe employ long-read sequencing technology to obtain full-length transcript sequences, elucidating cis-effects of variants on splicing changes at a single molecule level. We develop a computational workflow that augments FLAIR, a tool that calls isoform models expressed in long-read data, to integrate RNA variant calls with the associated isoforms that bear them. We generate nanopore data with high sequence accuracy from H1975 lung adenocarcinoma cells with and without knockdown of ADAR. We apply our workflow to identify key inosine isoform associations to help clarify the prominence of ADAR in tumorigenesis.ConclusionsUltimately, we find that a long-read approach provides valuable insight toward characterizing the relationship between RNA variants and splicing patterns.
BackgroundBromo-adjacent homology-plant homeodomain domain containing protein 1 (BP1) is a reader of histone post-translational modifications in fungi. BP1 recognizes trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone H3 (H3K27me3), an epigenetic hallmark of gene silencing. However, whether and how BP1 participates in transcriptional repression remains poorly understood.ResultsWe report that BP1 forms phase-separated liquid condensates to modulate its biological function in Fusarium graminearum. Deletion assays reveal that intrinsically disordered region 2 (IDR2) of BP1 mediates its liquid-liquid phase separation. The phase separation of BP1 is indispensable for its interaction with suppressor of Zeste 12, a component of polycomb repressive complex 2. Furthermore, IDR2 deletion abolishes BP1-H3K27me3 binding and alleviates the transcriptional repression of secondary metabolism-related genes, especially deoxynivalenol mycotoxin biosynthesis genes.ConclusionsBP1 maintains transcriptional repression by forming liquid-liquid phase-separated condensates, expanding our understanding of the relationship between post-translational modifications and liquid-liquid phase separation.
BackgroundGlioblastoma (GBM) brain tumors lacking IDH1 mutations (IDHwt) have the worst prognosis of all brain neoplasms. Patients receive surgery and chemoradiotherapy but tumors almost always fatally recur.ResultsUsing RNA sequencing data from 107 pairs of pre- and post-standard treatment locally recurrent IDHwt GBM tumors, we identify two responder subtypes based on longitudinal changes in gene expression. In two thirds of patients, a specific subset of genes is upregulated from primary to recurrence (Up responders), and in one third, the same genes are downregulated (Down responders), specifically in neoplastic cells. Characterization of the responder subtypes indicates subtype-specific adaptive treatment resistance mechanisms that are associated with distinct changes in the tumor microenvironment. In Up responders, recurrent tumors are enriched in quiescent proneural GBM stem cells and differentiated neoplastic cells, with increased interaction with the surrounding normal brain and neurotransmitter signaling, whereas Down responders commonly undergo mesenchymal transition. ChIP-sequencing data from longitudinal GBM tumors suggests that the observed transcriptional reprogramming could be driven by Polycomb-based chromatin remodeling rather than DNA methylation.ConclusionsWe show that the responder subtype is cancer-cell intrinsic, recapitulated in in vitro GBM cell models, and influenced by the presence of the tumor microenvironment. Stratifying GBM tumors by responder subtype may lead to more effective treatment.
Background: Telomeric repeat arrays at the ends of chromosomes are highly dynamic in composition, but their repetitive nature and technological limitations have made it difficult to assess their true variation in genome diversity surveys. Results: We have comprehensively characterized the sequence variation immediately adjacent to the canonical telomeric repeat arrays at the very ends of chromosomes in 74 genetically diverse Arabidopsis thaliana accessions. We first describe several types of distinct telomeric repeat units and then identify evolutionary processes such as local homogenization and higher-order repeat formation that shape diversity of chromosome ends. By comparing largely isogenic samples, we also determine repeat number variation of the degenerate and variant telomeric repeat array at both the germline and somatic levels. Finally, our analysis of haplotype structure uncovers chromosome end-specific patterns in the distribution of variant telomeric repeats, and their linkage to the more proximal non-coding region. Conclusions: Our findings illustrate the spectrum of telomeric repeat variation at multiple levels in A. thaliana-in germline and soma, across all chromosome ends, and across genetic groups-thereby expanding our knowledge of the evolution of chromosome ends.
BackgroundModeling of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) is limited due to a lack of direct measurements of genome-wide transcription factor activity (TFA) making it difficult to separate covariance and regulatory interactions. Inference of regulatory interactions and TFA requires aggregation of complementary evidence. Estimating TFA explicitly is problematic as it disconnects GRN inference and TFA estimation and is unable to account for, for example, contextual transcription factor-transcription factor interactions, and other higher order features. Deep-learning offers a potential solution, as it can model complex interactions and higher-order latent features, although does not provide interpretable models and latent features.ResultsWe propose a novel autoencoder-based framework, StrUcture Primed Inference of Regulation using latent Factor ACTivity (SupirFactor) for modeling, and a metric, explained relative variance (ERV), for interpretation of GRNs. We evaluate SupirFactor with ERV in a wide set of contexts. Compared to current state-of-the-art GRN inference methods, SupirFactor performs favorably. We evaluate latent feature activity as an estimate of TFA and biological function in S. cerevisiae as well as in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC).ConclusionHere we present a framework for structure-primed inference and interpretation of GRNs, SupirFactor, demonstrating interpretability using ERV in multiple biological and experimental settings. SupirFactor enables TFA estimation and pathway analysis using latent factor activity, demonstrated here on two large-scale single-cell datasets, modeling S. cerevisiae and PBMC. We find that the SupirFactor model facilitates biological analysis acquiring novel functional and regulatory insight.
Background: Variation in X chromosome inactivation (XCI) in human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) can impact their ability to model biological sex biases. The gene-wise landscape of X chromosome gene dosage remains unresolved in female hiPSCs. To characterize patterns of de-repression and escape from inactivation, we performed a systematic survey of allele specific expression in 165 female hiPSC lines. Results: XCI erosion is non-random and primarily affects genes that escape XCI in human tissues. Individual genes and cell lines vary in the frequency and degree of de-repression. Bi-allelic expression increases gradually after modest decrease of XIST in cultures, whose loss is commonly used to mark lines with eroded XCI. We identify three clusters of female lines at different stages of XCI. Increased XCI erosion amplifies female-biased expression at hypomethylated sites and regions normally occupied by repressive histone marks, lowering male-biased differences in the X chromosome. In autosomes, erosion modifies sex differences in a dose-dependent way. Male-biased genes are enriched for hypermethylated regions, and de-repression of XIST-bound autosomal genes in female lines attenuates normal male-biased gene expression in eroded lines. XCI erosion can compensate for a dominant loss of function effect in several disease genes. Conclusions: We present a comprehensive view of X chromosome gene dosage in hiPSCs and implicate a direct mechanism for XCI erosion in regulating autosomal gene expression in trans. The uncommon and variable reactivation of X chromosome genes in female hiPSCs can provide insight into X chromosome's role in regulating gene expression and sex differences in humans.
Background Metazoans inherited genes from unicellular ancestors that perform essential biological processes such as cell division, metabolism, and protein translation. Multicellularity requires careful control and coordination of these unicellular genes to maintain tissue integrity and homeostasis. Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) that arose during metazoan evolution are frequently altered in cancer, resulting in over-expression of unicellular genes. We propose that an imbalance in co-expression of unicellular (UC) and multicellular (MC) genes is a driving force in cancer.Results We combine gene co-expression analysis to infer changes to GRNs in cancer with protein sequence conservation data to distinguish genes with UC and MC origins. Co-expression networks created using RNA sequencing data from 31 tumor types and normal tissue samples are divided into modules enriched for UC genes, MC genes, or mixed UC-MC modules. The greatest differences between tumor and normal tissue co-expression networks occur within mixed UC-MC modules. MC and UC genes not commonly co-expressed in normal tissues form distinct co-expression modules seen only in tumors. The degree of rewiring of genes within mixed UC-MC modules increases with tumor grade and stage. Mixed UC-MC modules are enriched for somatic mutations in cancer genes, particularly amplifications, suggesting an important driver of the rewiring observed in tumors is copy number changes.Conclusions Our study shows the greatest changes to gene co-expression patterns during tumor progression occur between genes of MC and UC origins, implicating the breakdown and rewiring of metazoan gene regulatory networks in cancer development and progression.
Dramatic improvements in measuring genetic variation across agriculturally relevant populations (genomics) must be matched by improvements in identifying and measuring relevant trait variation in such populations across many environments (phenomics). Identifying the most critical opportunities and challenges in genome to phenome (G2P) research is the focus of this paper. Previously (Genome Biol, 23(1):1-11, 2022), we laid out how Agricultural Genome to Phenome Initiative (AG2PI) will coordinate activities with USA federal government agencies expand public-private partnerships, and engage with external stakeholders to achieve a shared vision of future the AG2PI. Acting on this latter step, AG2PI organized the "Thinking Big: Visualizing the Future of AG2PI" two-day workshop held September 9-10, 2022, in Ames, Iowa, co-hosted with the United State Department of Agriculture's National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA NIFA). During the meeting, attendees were asked to use their experience and curiosity to review the current status of agricultural genome to phenome (AG2P) work and envision the future of the AG2P field. The topic summaries composing this paper are distilled from two 1.5-h small group discussions. Challenges and solutions identified across multiple topics at the workshop were explored. We end our discussion with a vision for the future of agricultural progress, identifying two areas of innovation needed: (1) innovate in genetic improvement methods development and evaluation and (2) innovate in agricultural research processes to solve societal problems. To address these needs, we then provide six specific goals that we recommend be implemented immediately in support of advancing AG2P research.
BackgroundCRISPR-Cas9 dropout screens are formidable tools for investigating biology with unprecedented precision and scale. However, biases in data lead to potential confounding effects on interpretation and compromise overall quality. The activity of Cas9 is influenced by structural features of the target site, including copy number amplifications (CN bias). More worryingly, proximal targeted loci tend to generate similar gene-independent responses to CRISPR-Cas9 targeting (proximity bias), possibly due to Cas9-induced whole chromosome-arm truncations or other genomic structural features and different chromatin accessibility levels.ResultsWe benchmarked eight computational methods, rigorously evaluating their ability to reduce both CN and proximity bias in the two largest publicly available cell-line-based CRISPR-Cas9 screens to date. We also evaluated the capability of each method to preserve data quality and heterogeneity by assessing the extent to which the processed data allows accurate detection of true positive essential genes, established oncogenetic addictions, and known/novel biomarkers of cancer dependency.Our analysis sheds light on the ability of each method to correct biases under different scenarios. AC-Chronos outperforms other methods in correcting both CN and proximity biases when jointly processing multiple screens of models with available CN information, whereas CRISPRcleanR is the top performing method for individual screens or when CN information is not available. In addition, Chronos and AC-Chronos yield a final dataset better able to recapitulate known sets of essential and non-essential genes.ResultsWe benchmarked eight computational methods, rigorously evaluating their ability to reduce both CN and proximity bias in the two largest publicly available cell-line-based CRISPR-Cas9 screens to date. We also evaluated the capability of each method to preserve data quality and heterogeneity by assessing the extent to which the processed data allows accurate detection of true positive essential genes, established oncogenetic addictions, and known/novel biomarkers of cancer dependency.Our analysis sheds light on the ability of each method to correct biases under different scenarios. AC-Chronos outperforms other methods in correcting both CN and proximity biases when jointly processing multiple screens of models with available CN information, whereas CRISPRcleanR is the top performing method for individual screens or when CN information is not available. In addition, Chronos and AC-Chronos yield a final dataset better able to recapitulate known sets of essential and non-essential genes.ConclusionsOverall, our investigation provides guidance for the selection of the most appropriate bias-correction method, based on its strengths, weaknesses and experimental settings.
BackgroundTranscription factors bind DNA in specific sequence contexts. In addition to distinguishing one nucleobase from another, some transcription factors can distinguish between unmodified and modified bases. Current models of transcription factor binding tend not to take DNA modifications into account, while the recent few that do often have limitations. This makes a comprehensive and accurate profiling of transcription factor affinities difficult.ResultsHere, we develop methods to identify transcription factor binding sites in modified DNA. Our models expand the standard A/C/G/T DNA alphabet to include cytosine modifications. We develop Cytomod to create modified genomic sequences and we also enhance the MEME Suite, adding the capacity to handle custom alphabets. We adapt the well-established position weight matrix (PWM) model of transcription factor binding affinity to this expanded DNA alphabet. Using these methods, we identify modification-sensitive transcription factor binding motifs. We confirm established binding preferences, such as the preference of ZFP57 and C/EBP beta for methylated motifs and the preference of c-Myc for unmethylated E-box motifs.ConclusionsUsing known binding preferences to tune model parameters, we discover novel modified motifs for a wide array of transcription factors. Finally, we validate our binding preference predictions for OCT4 using cleavage under targets and release using nuclease (CUT&RUN) experiments across conventional, methylation-, and hydroxymethylation-enriched sequences. Our approach readily extends to other DNA modifications. As more genome-wide single-base resolution modification data becomes available, we expect that our method will yield insights into altered transcription factor binding affinities across many different modifications.
BackgroundPromoters serve as key elements in the regulation of gene transcription. In mammals, loop interactions between promoters and enhancers increase the complexity of the promoter-based regulatory networks. However, the identification of enhancer-promoter or promoter-related loops in Arabidopsis remains incomplete.ResultsHere, we use promoter capture Hi-C to identify promoter-related loops in Arabidopsis, which shows that gene body, proximal promoter, and intergenic regions can interact with promoters, potentially functioning as distal regulatory elements or enhancers. We find that promoter-related loops mainly repress gene transcription and are associated with ordered chromatin structures, such as topologically associating domains and fountains-chromatin structures not previously identified in Arabidopsis. Cohesin binds to the center of fountains and is involved in their formation. Moreover, fountain strength is positively correlated with the number of promoter-related loops, and the maintenance of these loops is linked to H3K4me3. In atxr3 mutants, which lack the major H3K4me3 methyltransferases in Arabidopsis, the number of promoter-related loops at fountains is reduced, leading to upregulation of fountain-regulated genes.ConclusionsWe identify promoter-related loops associated with ordered chromatin structures and reveal the molecular mechanisms involved in fountain formation and maintenance.
Background CRISPR/Cas-derived base editor enables precise editing of target sites and has been widely used for basic research and crop genetic improvement. However, the editing efficiency of base editors at different targets varies greatly. Results Here, we develop a set of highly efficient base editors in cotton plants. GhABE8e, which is fused to conventional nCas9, exhibits 99.9% editing efficiency, compared to GhABE7.10 with 64.9%, and no off-target editing is detected. We further replace nCas9 with dCpf1, which recognizes TTTV PAM sequences, to broaden the range of the target site. To explore the functional divergence of TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (TFL1), we edit the non-coding and coding regions of GhTFL1 with 26 targets to generate a comprehensive allelic population including 300 independent lines in cotton. This allows hidden pleiotropic roles for GhTFL1 to be revealed and allows us to rapidly achieve directed domestication of cotton and create ideotype germplasm with moderate height, shortened fruiting branches, compact plant, and early-flowering. Further, by exploring the molecular mechanism of the GhTFL1(L86P) and GhTFL1(K53G+S78G) mutations, we find that the GhTFL1(L86P) mutation weakens the binding strength of the GhTFL1 to other proteins but does not lead to a complete loss of GhTFL1 function. Conclusions This strategy provides an important technical platform and genetic information for the study and creation of ideal plant architecture.
BackgroundPolyploidy is widely recognized as a significant evolutionary force in the plant kingdom, contributing to the diversification of plants. One of the notable features of allopolyploidy is the occurrence of homoeologous exchange (HE) events between the subgenomes, causing changes in genomic composition, gene expression, and phenotypic variations. However, the role of HE in plant adaptation and domestication remains unclear. ResultsHere we analyze the whole-genome resequencing data from Brassica napus accessions representing the different morphotypes and ecotypes, to investigate the role of HE in domestication. Our findings demonstrate frequent occurrence of HEs in Brassica napus, with substantial HE patterns shared across populations, indicating their potential role in promoting crop domestication. HE events are asymmetric, with the A genome more frequently replacing C genome segments. These events show a preference for specific genomic regions and vary among populations. We also identify candidate genes in HE regions specific to certain populations, which likely contribute to flowering-time diversification across diverse morphotypes and ecotypes. In addition, we assemble a new genome of a swede accession, confirming the HE signals on the genome and their potential involvement in root tuber development. By analyzing HE in another allopolyploid species, Brassica juncea, we characterize a potential broader role of HE in allopolyploid crop domestication. ConclusionsOur results provide novel insights into the domestication of polyploid Brassica species and highlight homoeologous exchange as a crucial mechanism for generating variations that are selected for crop improvement in polyploid species.
In droplet-based single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq assays, systematic contamination of ambient RNA molecules biases the quantification of gene expression levels. Existing methods correct the contamination for all genes globally. However, there lacks specific evaluation of correction efficacy for varying contamination levels. Here, we show that DecontX and CellBender under-correct highly contaminating genes, while SoupX and scAR over-correct lowly/non-contaminating genes. Here, we develop scCDC as the first method to detect the contamination-causing genes and only correct expression levels of these genes, some of which are cell-type markers. Compared with existing decontamination methods, scCDC excels in decontaminating highly contaminating genes while avoiding over-correction of other genes.
The identification of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) is crucial for understanding cellular differentiation. Single-cell RNA sequencing data encode gene-level covariations at high resolution, yet data sparsity and high dimensionality hamper accurate and scalable GRN reconstruction. To overcome these challenges, we introduce NetID leveraging homogenous metacells while avoiding spurious gene-gene correlations. Benchmarking demonstrates superior performance of NetID compared to imputation-based methods. By incorporating cell fate probability information, NetID facilitates the prediction of lineage-specific GRNs and recovers known network motifs governing bone marrow hematopoiesis, making it a powerful toolkit for deciphering gene regulatory control of cellular differentiation from large-scale single-cell transcriptome data.
Background: Base editing is a powerful tool for artificial evolution to create allelic diversity and improve agronomic traits. However, the great evolutionary potential for every sgRNA target has been overlooked. And there is currently no high-throughput method for generating and characterizing as many changes in a single target as possible based on large mutant pools to permit rapid gene directed evolution in plants. Results: In this study, we establish an efficient germline-specific evolution system to screen beneficial alleles in Arabidopsis which could be applied for crop improvement. This system is based on a strong egg cell-specific cytosine base editor and the large seed production of Arabidopsis, which enables each T1 plant with unedited wild type alleles to produce thousands of independent T2 mutant lines. It has the ability of creating a wide range of mutant lines, including those containing atypical base substitutions, and as well providing a space- and labor-saving way to store and screen the resulting mutant libraries. Using this system, we efficiently generate herbicide-resistant EPSPS, ALS, and HPPD variants that could be used in crop breeding. Conclusions: Here, we demonstrate the significant potential of base editing-mediated artificial evolution for each sgRNA target and devised an efficient system for conducting deep evolution to harness this potential.
Advances in spatial transcriptomics provide an unprecedented opportunity to reveal the structure and function of biology systems. However, current algorithms fail to address the heterogeneity and interpretability of spatial transcriptomics data. Here, we present a multi-layer network model for identifying spatial domains in spatial transcriptomics data with joint learning. We demonstrate that spatial domains can be precisely characterized and discriminated by the topological structure of cell networks, facilitating identification and interpretability of spatial domains, which outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. Furthermore, we prove that network model offers an effective and efficient strategy for integrative analysis of spatial transcriptomics data from various platforms.
Background Untranslated regions (UTRs) are important mediators of post-transcriptional regulation. The length of UTRs and the composition of regulatory elements within them are known to vary substantially across genes, but little is known about the reasons for this variation in humans. Here, we set out to determine whether this variation, specifically in 5'UTRs, correlates with gene dosage sensitivity.Results We investigate 5'UTR length, the number of alternative transcription start sites, the potential for alternative splicing, the number and type of upstream open reading frames (uORFs) and the propensity of 5'UTRs to form secondary structures. We explore how these elements vary by gene tolerance to loss-of-function (LoF; using the LOEUF metric), and in genes where changes in dosage are known to cause disease. We show that LOEUF correlates with 5'UTR length and complexity. Genes that are most intolerant to LoF have longer 5'UTRs, greater TSS diversity, and more upstream regulatory elements than their LoF tolerant counterparts. We show that these differences are evident in disease gene-sets, but not in recessive developmental disorder genes where LoF of a single allele is tolerated.Conclusions Our results confirm the importance of post-transcriptional regulation through 5'UTRs in tight regulation of mRNA and protein levels, particularly for genes where changes in dosage are deleterious and lead to disease. Finally, to support gene-based investigation we release a web-based browser tool, VuTR, that supports exploration of the composition of individual 5'UTRs and the impact of genetic variation within them.
BackgroundMosaic loss of Y chromosome (LOY) is the most common chromosomal alteration in aging men. Here, we use single-cell RNA and ATAC sequencing to show that LOY is present in the kidney and increases with age and chronic kidney disease.ResultsThe likelihood of a cell having LOY varies depending on its location in the nephron. Cortical epithelial cell types have a greater proportion of LOY than medullary or glomerular cell types, which may reflect their proliferative history. Proximal tubule cells are the most abundant cell type in the cortex and are susceptible to hypoxic injury. A subset of these cells acquires a pro-inflammatory transcription and chromatin accessibility profile associated with expression of HAVCR1, VCAM1, and PROM1. These injured epithelial cells have the greatest proportion of LOY and their presence predicts future kidney function decline. Moreover, proximal tubule cells with LOY are more likely to harbor additional large chromosomal gains and express pro-survival pathways. Spatial transcriptomics localizes injured proximal tubule cells to a pro-fibrotic microenvironment where they adopt a secretory phenotype and likely communicate with infiltrating immune cells.ConclusionsWe hypothesize that LOY is an indicator of increased DNA damage and potential marker of cellular senescence that can be applied to single-cell datasets in other tissues.
BackgroundGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of loci for disease-related human traits in cross-sectional data. However, the impact of age on genetic effects is underacknowledged. Also, identifying genetic effects on longitudinal trait change has been hampered by small sample sizes for longitudinal data. Such effects on deteriorating trait levels over time or disease progression can be clinically relevant.ResultsUnder certain assumptions, we demonstrate analytically that genetic-by-age interaction observed in cross-sectional data can be indicative of genetic association on longitudinal trait change. We propose a 2-stage approach with genome-wide pre-screening for genetic-by-age interaction in cross-sectional data and testing identified variants for longitudinal change in independent longitudinal data. Within UK Biobank cross-sectional data, we analyze 8 complex traits (up to 370,000 individuals). We identify 44 genetic-by-age interactions (7 loci for obesity traits, 26 for pulse pressure, few to none for lipids). Our cross-trait view reveals trait-specificity regarding the proportion of loci with age-modulated effects, which is particularly high for pulse pressure. Testing the 44 variants in longitudinal data (up to 50,000 individuals), we observe significant effects on change for obesity traits (near APOE, TMEM18, TFAP2B) and pulse pressure (near FBN1, IGFBP3; known for implication in arterial stiffness processes).ConclusionsWe provide analytical and empirical evidence that cross-sectional genetic-by-age interaction can help pinpoint longitudinal-change effects, when cross-sectional data surpasses longitudinal sample size. Our findings shed light on the distinction between traits that are impacted by age-dependent genetic effects and those that are not.
BackgroundIn microbiome disease association studies, it is a fundamental task to test which microbes differ in their abundance between groups. Yet, consensus on suitable or optimal statistical methods for differential abundance testing is lacking, and it remains unexplored how these cope with confounding. Previous differential abundance benchmarks relying on simulated datasets did not quantitatively evaluate the similarity to real data, which undermines their recommendations.ResultsOur simulation framework implants calibrated signals into real taxonomic profiles, including signals mimicking confounders. Using several whole meta-genome and 16S rRNA gene amplicon datasets, we validate that our simulated data resembles real data from disease association studies much more than in previous benchmarks. With extensively parametrized simulations, we benchmark the performance of nineteen differential abundance methods and further evaluate the best ones on confounded simulations. Only classic statistical methods (linear models, the Wilcoxon test, t-test), limma, and fastANCOM properly control false discoveries at relatively high sensitivity. When additionally considering confounders, these issues are exacerbated, but we find that adjusted differential abundance testing can effectively mitigate them. In a large cardiometabolic disease dataset, we showcase that failure to account for covariates such as medication causes spurious association in real-world applications.ConclusionsTight error control is critical for microbiome association studies. The unsatisfactory performance of many differential abundance methods and the persistent danger of unchecked confounding suggest these contribute to a lack of reproducibility among such studies. We have open-sourced our simulation and benchmarking software to foster a much-needed consolidation of statistical methodology for microbiome research.
Spatial transcriptomics is revolutionizing the exploration of intratissue heterogeneity in cancer, yet capturing cellular niches and their spatial relationships remains challenging. We introduce SpottedPy, a Python package designed to identify tumor hotspots and map spatial interactions within the cancer ecosystem. Using SpottedPy, we examine epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity in breast cancer and highlight stable niches associated with angiogenic and hypoxic regions, shielded by CAFs and macrophages. Hybrid and mesenchymal hotspot distribution follows transformation gradients reflecting progressive immunosuppression. Our method offers flexibility to explore spatial relationships at different scales, from immediate neighbors to broader tissue modules, providing new insights into tumor microenvironment dynamics.
Genome sequencing has become a routine task for biologists, but the challenge of gene structure annotation persists, impeding accurate genomic and genetic research. Here, we present a bioinformatics toolkit, SynGAP (Synteny-based Gene structure Annotation Polisher), which uses gene synteny information to accomplish precise and automated polishing of gene structure annotation of genomes. SynGAP offers exceptional capabilities in the improvement of gene structure annotation quality and the profiling of integrative gene synteny between species. Furthermore, an expression variation index is designed for comparative transcriptomics analysis to explore candidate genes responsible for the development of distinct traits observed in phylogenetically related species.
BackgroundThe safety of CRISPR-based gene editing methods is of the utmost priority in clinical applications. Previous studies have reported that Cas9 cleavage induced frequent aneuploidy in primary human T cells, but whether cleavage-mediated editing of base editors would generate off-target structure variations remains unknown. Here, we investigate the potential off-target structural variations associated with CRISPR/Cas9, ABE, and CBE editing in mouse embryos and primary human T cells by whole-genome sequencing and single-cell RNA-seq analyses.ResultsThe results show that both Cas9 and ABE generate off-target structural variations (SVs) in mouse embryos, while CBE induces rare SVs. In addition, off-target large deletions are detected in 32.74% of primary human T cells transfected with Cas9 and 9.17% of cells transfected with ABE. Moreover, Cas9-induced aneuploid cells activate the P53 and apoptosis pathways, whereas ABE-associated aneuploid cells significantly upregulate cell cycle-related genes and are arrested in the G0 phase. A percentage of 16.59% and 4.29% aneuploid cells are still observable at 3 weeks post transfection of Cas9 or ABE. These off-target phenomena in ABE are universal as observed in other cell types such as B cells and Huh7. Furthermore, the off-target SVs are significantly reduced in cells treated with high-fidelity ABE (ABE-V106W).ConclusionsThis study shows both CRISPR/Cas9 and ABE induce off-target SVs in mouse embryos and primary human T cells, raising an urgent need for the development of high-fidelity gene editing tools.
Background As most viruses remain uncultivated, metagenomics is currently the main method for virus discovery. Detecting viruses in metagenomic data is not trivial. In the past few years, many bioinformatic virus identification tools have been developed for this task, making it challenging to choose the right tools, parameters, and cutoffs. As all these tools measure different biological signals, and use different algorithms and training and reference databases, it is imperative to conduct an independent benchmarking to give users objective guidance.Results We compare the performance of nine state-of-the-art virus identification tools in thirteen modes on eight paired viral and microbial datasets from three distinct biomes, including a new complex dataset from Antarctic coastal waters. The tools have highly variable true positive rates (0-97%) and false positive rates (0-30%). PPR-Meta best distinguishes viral from microbial contigs, followed by DeepVirFinder, VirSorter2, and VIBRANT. Different tools identify different subsets of the benchmarking data and all tools, except for Sourmash, find unique viral contigs. Performance of tools improved with adjusted parameter cutoffs, indicating that adjustment of parameter cutoffs before usage should be considered.Conclusions Together, our independent benchmarking facilitates selecting choices of bioinformatic virus identification tools and gives suggestions for parameter adjustments to viromics researchers.
Background: Methanomassiliicoccales are a recently identified order of methanogens that are diverse across global environments particularly the gastrointestinal tracts of animals; however, their metabolic capacities are defined via a limited number of cultured strains.Results: Here, we profile and analyze 243 Methanomassiliicoccales genomes assembled from cultured representatives and uncultured metagenomes recovered from various biomes, including the gastrointestinal tracts of different animal species. Our analyses reveal the presence of numerous undefined genera and genetic variability in metabolic capabilities within Methanomassiliicoccales lineages, which is essential for adaptation to their ecological niches. In particular, gastrointestinal tract Methanomassiliicoccales demonstrate the presence of co-diversified members with their hosts over evolutionary timescales and likely originated in the natural environment. We highlight the presence of diverse clades of vitamin transporter BtuC proteins that distinguish Methanomassiliicoccales from other archaeal orders and likely provide a competitive advantage in efficiently handling B-12. Furthermore, genome-centric metatranscriptomic analysis of ruminants with varying methane yields reveal elevated expression of select Methanomassiliicoccales genera in low methane animals and suggest that B-12 exchanges could enable them to occupy ecological niches that possibly alter the direction of H-2 utilization.Conclusions: We provide a comprehensive and updated account of divergent Methanomassiliicoccales lineages, drawing from numerous uncultured genomes obtained from various habitats. We also highlight their unique metabolic capabilities involving B-12, which could serve as promising targets for mitigating ruminant methane emissions by altering H-2 flow.
Background Powdery mildew is a disease with one of the most substantial impacts on cucumber production globally. The most efficient approach for controlling powdery mildew is the development of genetic resistance; however, few genes associated with inherent variations in cucumber powdery mildew resistance have been identified as of yet. Results In this study, we re-sequence 299 cucumber accessions, which are divided into four geographical groups. A genome-wide association study identifies 50 sites significantly associated with natural variations in powdery mildew resistance. Linkage disequilibrium analysis further divides these 50 sites into 32 linkage disequilibrium blocks containing 41 putative genes. Virus-induced gene silencing and gene expression analysis implicate CsGy5G015960, which encodes a phosphate transporter, as the candidate gene regulating powdery mildew resistance. On the basis of the resequencing data, we generate five CsGy5G015960 haplotypes, identifying Hap.1 as the haplotype most likely associated with powdery mildew resistance. In addition, we determine that a 29-bp InDel in the 3 ' untranslated region of CsGy5G015960 is responsible for mRNA stability. Overexpression of CsGy5G015960(Hap.1) in the susceptible line enhances powdery mildew resistance and phosphorus accumulation. Further comparative RNA-seq analysis demonstrates that CsGy5G015960(Hap.1) may regulate cucumber powdery mildew resistance by maintaining a higher H2O2 level through the depletion of multiple class III peroxidases. Conclusions Here we identify a candidate powdery mildew-resistant gene in cucumber using GWAS. The identified gene may be a promising target for molecular breeding and genetic engineering in cucumber to enhance powdery mildew resistance.
A critical challenge of single-cell spatial transcriptomics (sc-ST) technologies is their panel size. Being based on fluorescence in situ hybridization, they are typically limited to panels of about a thousand genes. This constrains researchers to build panels from only the marker genes of different cell types and forgo other genes of interest, e.g., genes encoding ligand-receptor complexes or those in specific pathways. We propose scGIST, a constrained feature selection tool that designs sc-ST panels prioritizing user-specified genes without compromising cell type detection accuracy. We demonstrate scGIST's efficacy in diverse use cases, highlighting it as a valuable addition to sc-ST's algorithmic toolbox.
BackgroundPhosphorus is a macronutrient necessary for plant growth and development and its availability and efficient use affect crop yields. Leaves are the largest tissue that uses phosphorus in plants, and membrane phospholipids are the main source of cellular phosphorus usage.ResultsHere we identify a key process for plant cellular phosphorus recycling mediated by membrane phospholipid hydrolysis during leaf senescence. Our results indicate that over 90% of lipid phosphorus, accounting for more than one-third of total cellular phosphorus, is recycled from senescent leaves before falling off the plants. Nonspecific phospholipase C4 (NPC4) and phospholipase D zeta 2 (PLD zeta 2) are highly induced during leaf senescence, and knockouts of PLD zeta 2 and NPC4 decrease the loss of membrane phospholipids and delay leaf senescence. Conversely, overexpression of PLD zeta 2 and NPC4 accelerates the loss of phospholipids and leaf senescence, promoting phosphorus remobilization from senescent leaves to young tissues and plant growth. We also show that this phosphorus recycling process in senescent leaves mediated by membrane phospholipid hydrolysis is conserved in plants.ConclusionsThese results indicate that PLD zeta 2- and NPC4-mediated membrane phospholipid hydrolysis promotes phosphorus remobilization from senescent leaves to growing tissues and that the phospholipid hydrolysis-mediated phosphorus recycling improves phosphorus use efficiency in plants.
BackgroundDeletion of haploinsufficient genes or duplication of triplosensitive ones results in phenotypic effects in a concentration-dependent manner, and the mechanisms underlying these dosage-sensitive effects remain elusive. Phase separation drives functional compartmentalization of biomolecules in a concentration-dependent manner as well, which suggests a potential link between these two processes, and warrants further systematic investigation.ResultsHere we provide bioinformatic and experimental evidence to show a close link between phase separation and dosage sensitivity. We first demonstrate that haploinsufficient or triplosensitive gene products exhibit a higher tendency to undergo phase separation. Assessing the well-established dosage-sensitive genes HNRNPK, PAX6, and PQBP1 with experiments, we show that these proteins undergo phase separation. Critically, pathogenic variations in dosage-sensitive genes disturb the phase separation process either through reduced protein levels, or loss of phase-separation-prone regions. Analysis of multi-omics data further demonstrates that loss-of-function genetic perturbations on phase-separating genes cause similar dysfunction phenotypes as dosage-sensitive gene perturbations. In addition, dosage-sensitive scores derived from population genetics data predict phase-separating proteins with much better performance than available sequence-based predictors, further illustrating close ties between these two parameters.ConclusionsTogether, our study shows that phase separation is functionally linked to dosage sensitivity and provides novel insights for phase-separating protein prediction from the perspective of population genetics data.
BackgroundTo analyze the large volume of data generated by single-cell technologies and to identify cellular correlates of particular clinical or experimental outcomes, differential abundance analyses are often applied. These algorithms identify subgroups of cells whose abundances change significantly in response to disease progression, or to an experimental perturbation. Despite the effectiveness of differential abundance analyses in identifying critical cell-states, there is currently no systematic benchmarking study to compare their applicability, usefulness, and accuracy in practice across single-cell modalities.ResultsHere, we perform a comprehensive benchmarking study to objectively evaluate and compare the benefits and potential downsides of current state-of-the-art differential abundance testing methods. We benchmarked six single-cell testing methods on several practical tasks, using both synthetic and real single-cell datasets. The tasks evaluated include effectiveness in identifying true differentially abundant subpopulations, accuracy in the adequate handling of batch effects, runtime efficiency, and hyperparameter usability and robustness. Based on various evaluation results, this paper gives dataset-specific suggestions for the practical use of differential abundance testing approaches.ConclusionsBased on our benchmarking study, we provide a set of recommendations for the optimal usage of single-cell DA testing methods in practice, particularly with respect to factors such as the presence of technical noise (for example batch effects), dataset size, and hyperparameter sensitivity.
BackgroundCRISPR/Cas13 system, recognized for its compact size and specificity in targeting RNA, is currently employed for RNA degradation. However, the potential of various CRISPR/Cas13 subtypes, particularly concerning the knockdown of endogenous transcripts, remains to be comprehensively characterized in plants.ResultsHere we present a full spectrum of editing profiles for seven Cas13 orthologs from five distinct subtypes: VI-A (LwaCas13a), VI-B (PbuCas13b), VI-D (RfxCas13d), VI-X (Cas13x.1 and Cas13x.2), and VI-Y (Cas13y.1 and Cas13y.2). A systematic evaluation of the knockdown effects on two endogenous transcripts (GhCLA and GhPGF in cotton) as well as an RNA virus (TMV in tobacco) reveals that RfxCas13d, Cas13x.1, and Cas13x.2 exhibit enhanced stability with editing efficiencies ranging from 58 to 80%, closely followed by Cas13y.1 and Cas13y.2. Notably, both Cas13x.1 and Cas13y.1 can simultaneously degrade two endogenous transcripts through a tRNA-crRNA cassette approach, achieving editing efficiencies of up to 50%. Furthermore, different Cas13 orthologs enable varying degrees of endogenous transcript knockdown with minimal off-target effects, generating germplasms that exhibit a diverse spectrum of mutant phenotypes. Transgenic tobacco plants show significant reductions in damage, along with mild oxidative stress and minimal accumulation of viral particles after TMV infection.ConclusionsIn conclusion, our study presents an efficient and reliable platform for transcriptome editing that holds promise for plant functional research and future crop improvement.
Batch effects in omics data are notoriously common technical variations unrelated to study objectives, and may result in misleading outcomes if uncorrected, or hinder biomedical discovery if over-corrected. Assessing and mitigating batch effects is crucial for ensuring the reliability and reproducibility of omics data and minimizing the impact of technical variations on biological interpretation. In this review, we highlight the profound negative impact of batch effects and the urgent need to address this challenging problem in large-scale omics studies. We summarize potential sources of batch effects, current progress in evaluating and correcting them, and consortium efforts aiming to tackle them.
CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) is the leading technique to silence gene expression in bacteria; however, design rules remain poorly defined. We develop a best-in-class prediction algorithm for guide silencing efficiency by systematically investigating factors influencing guide depletion in genome-wide essentiality screens, with the surprising discovery that gene-specific features substantially impact prediction. We develop a mixed-effect random forest regression model that provides better estimates of guide efficiency. We further apply methods from explainable AI to extract interpretable design rules from the model. This study provides a blueprint for predictive models for CRISPR technologies where only indirect measurements of guide activity are available.
BackgroundInhomogeneous patterns of chromatin-chromatin contacts within 10-100-kb-sized regions of the genome are a generic feature of chromatin spatial organization. These features, termed topologically associating domains (TADs), have led to the loop extrusion factor (LEF) model. Currently, our ability to model TADs relies on the observation that in vertebrates TAD boundaries are correlated with DNA sequences that bind CTCF, which therefore is inferred to block loop extrusion. However, although TADs feature prominently in their Hi-C maps, non-vertebrate eukaryotes either do not express CTCF or show few TAD boundaries that correlate with CTCF sites. In all of these organisms, the counterparts of CTCF remain unknown, frustrating comparisons between Hi-C data and simulations.ResultsTo extend the LEF model across the tree of life, here, we propose the conserved-current loop extrusion (CCLE) model that interprets loop-extruding cohesin as a nearly conserved probability current. From cohesin ChIP-seq data alone, we derive a position-dependent loop extrusion rate, allowing for a modified paradigm for loop extrusion, that goes beyond solely localized barriers to also include loop extrusion rates that vary continuously. We show that CCLE accurately predicts the TAD-scale Hi-C maps of interphase Schizosaccharomyces pombe, as well as those of meiotic and mitotic Saccharomyces cerevisiae, demonstrating its utility in organisms lacking CTCF.ConclusionsThe success of CCLE in yeasts suggests that loop extrusion by cohesin is indeed the primary mechanism underlying TADs in these systems. CCLE allows us to obtain loop extrusion parameters such as the LEF density and processivity, which compare well to independent estimates.
BackgroundUV-B, an important environmental factor, has been shown to affect the yield and quality of rice (Oryza sativa) worldwide. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the response to UV-B stress remain elusive in rice.ResultsWe perform comprehensive metabolic profiling of leaves from 160 diverse rice accessions under UV-B and normal light conditions using a widely targeted metabolomics approach. Our results reveal substantial differences in metabolite accumulation between the two major rice subspecies indica and japonica, especially after UV-B treatment, implying the possible role and mechanism of metabolome changes in subspecies differentiation and the stress response. We next conduct a transcriptome analysis from four representative rice varieties under UV-B stress, revealing genes from amino acid and flavonoid pathways involved in the UV-B response. We further perform a metabolite-based genome-wide association study (mGWAS), which reveals 3307 distinct loci under UV-B stress. Identification and functional validation of candidate genes show that OsMYB44 regulates tryptamine accumulation to mediate UV-B tolerance, while OsUVR8 interacts with OsMYB110 to promote flavonoid accumulation and UV-B tolerance in a coordinated manner. Additionally, haplotype analysis suggests that natural variation of OsUVR8groupA contributes to UV-B resistance in rice.ConclusionsOur study reveals the complex biochemical and genetic foundations that govern the metabolite dynamics underlying the response, tolerance, and adaptive strategies of rice to UV-B stress. These findings provide new insights into the biochemical and genetic basis of the metabolome underlying the crop response, tolerance, and adaptation to UV-B stress.
We develop a large-scale single-cell ATAC-seq method by combining Tn5-based pre-indexing with 10x Genomics barcoding, enabling the indexing of up to 200,000 nuclei across multiple samples in a single reaction. We profile 449,953 nuclei across diverse tissues, including the human cortex, mouse brain, human lung, mouse lung, mouse liver, and lung tissue from a club cell secretory protein knockout (CC16-/-) model. Our study of CC16-/- nuclei uncovers previously underappreciated technical artifacts derived from remnant 129 mouse strain genetic material, which cause profound cell-type-specific changes in regulatory elements near many genes, thereby confounding the interpretation of this commonly referenced mouse model.
BackgroundThe oncogenic protein HOXA9 plays a critical role in leukemia transformation and maintenance, and its aberrant expression is a hallmark of most aggressive acute leukemia. Although inhibiting the upstream regulators of HOXA9 has been proven as a significant therapeutic intervention, the comprehensive regulation network controlling HOXA9 expression in leukemia has not been systematically investigated.ResultsHere, we perform genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screening in the HOXA9-driven reporter acute leukemia cells. We identify a poorly characterized RNA-binding protein, RBM5, as the top candidate gene required to maintain leukemia cell fitness. RBM5 is highly overexpressed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients compared to healthy individuals. RBM5 loss triggered by CRISPR knockout and shRNA knockdown significantly impairs leukemia maintenance in vitro and in vivo. Through domain CRISPR screening, we reveal that RBM5 functions through a noncanonical transcriptional regulation circuitry rather than RNA splicing, such an effect depending on DNA-binding domains. By integrative analysis and functional assays, we identify HOXA9 as the downstream target of RBM5. Ectopic expression of HOXA9 rescues impaired leukemia cell proliferation upon RBM5 loss. Importantly, acute protein degradation of RBM5 through auxin-inducible degron system immediately reduces HOXA9 transcription.ConclusionsWe identify RBM5 as a new upstream regulator of HOXA9 and reveal its essential role in controlling the survival of AML. These functional and molecular mechanisms further support RBM5 as a promising therapeutic target for myeloid leukemia treatment.
BackgroundVarious laboratory-developed metabolomic methods lead to big challenges in inter-laboratory comparability and effective integration of diverse datasets.ResultsAs part of the Quartet Project, we establish a publicly available suite of four metabolite reference materials derived from B lymphoblastoid cell lines from a family of parents and monozygotic twin daughters. We generate comprehensive LC-MS-based metabolomic data from the Quartet reference materials using targeted and untargeted strategies in different laboratories. The Quartet multi-sample-based signal-to-noise ratio enables objective assessment of the reliability of intra-batch and cross-batch metabolomics profiling in detecting intrinsic biological differences among the four groups of samples. Significant variations in the reliability of the metabolomics profiling are identified across laboratories. Importantly, ratio-based metabolomics profiling, by scaling the absolute values of a study sample relative to those of a common reference sample, enables cross-laboratory quantitative data integration. Thus, we construct the ratio-based high-confidence reference datasets between two reference samples, providing "ground truth" for inter-laboratory accuracy assessment, which enables objective evaluation of quantitative metabolomics profiling using various instruments and protocols.ConclusionsOur study provides the community with rich resources and best practices for inter-laboratory proficiency tests and data integration, ensuring reliability of large-scale and longitudinal metabolomic studies.
Background: RNA secondary structure (RSS) can influence the regulation of transcription, RNA processing, and protein synthesis, among other processes. 3 ' untranslated regions (3 ' UTRs) of mRNA also hold the key for many aspects of gene regulation. However, there are often contradictory results regarding the roles of RSS in 3 ' UTRs in gene expression in different organisms and/or contexts. Results:Here, we incidentally observe that the primary substrate of miR159a (primiR159a), when embedded in a 3 ' UTR, could promote mRNA accumulation. The enhanced expression is attributed to the earlier polyadenylation of the transcript within the hybrid pri-miR159a-3 ' UTR and, resultantly, a poorly structured 3 ' UTR. RNA decay assays indicate that poorly structured 3 ' UTRs could promote mRNA stability, whereas highly structured 3 ' UTRs destabilize mRNA in vivo. Genome-wide DMSMaPseq also reveals the prevailing inverse relationship between 3 ' UTRs' RSS and tran- script accumulation in the transcriptomes of Arabidopsis, rice, and even human. Mechanistically, transcripts with highly structured 3 ' UTRs are preferentially degraded by 3 '-5 ' exoribonuclease SOV and 5 '-3 ' exoribonuclease XRN4, leading to decreased expression in Arabidopsis. Finally, we engineer diferent structured 3 ' UTRs to an endog- enous FT gene and alter the FT-regulated fowering time in Arabidopsis. Conclusions: We conclude that highly structured 3 ' UTRs typically cause reduced accumulation of the harbored transcripts in Arabidopsis. This pattern extends to rice and even mammals. Furthermore, our study provides a new strategy of engineering the 3 ' UTRs' RSS to modify plant traits in agricultural production and mRNA stability in biotechnology.
Targeted spatial transcriptomics hold particular promise in analyzing complex tissues. Most such methods, however, measure only a limited panel of transcripts, which need to be selected in advance to inform on the cell types or processes being studied. A limitation of existing gene selection methods is their reliance on scRNA-seq data, ignoring platform effects between technologies. Here we describe gpsFISH, a computational method performing gene selection through optimizing detection of known cell types. By modeling and adjusting for platform effects, gpsFISH outperforms other methods. Furthermore, gpsFISH can incorporate cell type hierarchies and custom gene preferences to accommodate diverse design requirements.
The rapid rise in the availability and scale of scRNA-seq data needs scalable methods for integrative analysis. Though many methods for data integration have been developed, few focus on understanding the heterogeneous effects of biological conditions across different cell populations in integrative analysis. Our proposed scalable approach, scParser, models the heterogeneous effects from biological conditions, which unveils the key mechanisms by which gene expression contributes to phenotypes. Notably, the extended scParser pinpoints biological processes in cell subpopulations that contribute to disease pathogenesis. scParser achieves favorable performance in cell clustering compared to state-of-the-art methods and has a broad and diverse applicability.
Background Polygenic risk score (PRS) is a major research topic in human genetics. However, a significant gap exists between PRS methodology and applications in practice due to often unavailable individual-level data for various PRS tasks including model fine-tuning, benchmarking, and ensemble learning.ResultsWe introduce an innovative statistical framework to optimize and benchmark PRS models using summary statistics of genome-wide association studies. This framework builds upon our previous work and can fine-tune virtually all existing PRS models while accounting for linkage disequilibrium. In addition, we provide an ensemble learning strategy named PUMAS-ensemble to combine multiple PRS models into an ensemble score without requiring external data for model fitting. Through extensive simulations and analysis of many complex traits in the UK Biobank, we demonstrate that this approach closely approximates gold-standard analytical strategies based on external validation, and substantially outperforms state-of-the-art PRS methods.ConclusionsOur method is a powerful and general modeling technique that can continue to combine the best-performing PRS methods out there through ensemble learning and could become an integral component for all future PRS applications.
Protein function annotation has been one of the longstanding issues in biological sciences, and various computational methods have been developed. However, the existing methods suffer from a serious long-tail problem, with a large number of GO families containing few annotated proteins. Herein, an innovative strategy named AnnoPRO was therefore constructed by enabling sequence-based multi-scale protein representation, dual-path protein encoding using pre-training, and function annotation by long short-term memory-based decoding. A variety of case studies based on different benchmarks were conducted, which confirmed the superior performance of AnnoPRO among available methods. Source code and models have been made freely available at: https://github.com/idrblab/AnnoPRO and https://zenodo.org/records/10012272
BackgroundThe vast majority of findings from human genome-wide association studies (GWAS) map to non-coding sequences, complicating their mechanistic interpretations and clinical translations. Non-coding sequences that are evolutionarily conserved and biochemically active could offer clues to the mechanisms underpinning GWAS discoveries. However, genetic effects of such sequences have not been systematically examined across a wide range of human tissues and traits, hampering progress to fully understand regulatory causes of human complex traits.ResultsHere we develop a simple yet effective strategy to identify functional elements exhibiting high levels of human-mouse sequence conservation and enhancer-like biochemical activity, which scales well to 313 epigenomic datasets across 106 human tissues and cell types. Combined with 468 GWAS of European (EUR) and East Asian (EAS) ancestries, these elements show tissue-specific enrichments of heritability and causal variants for many traits, which are significantly stronger than enrichments based on enhancers without sequence conservation. These elements also help prioritize candidate genes that are functionally relevant to body mass index (BMI) and schizophrenia but were not reported in previous GWAS with large sample sizes.ConclusionsOur findings provide a comprehensive assessment of how sequence-conserved enhancer-like elements affect complex traits in diverse tissues and demonstrate a generalizable strategy of integrating evolutionary and biochemical data to elucidate human disease genetics.
Background The functional coupling between alternative pre-mRNA splicing (AS) and the mRNA quality control mechanism called nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) can modulate transcript abundance. Previous studies have identified several examples of such a regulation in developing neurons. However, the systems-level effects of AS-NMD in this context are poorly understood.Results We developed an R package, factR2, which offers a comprehensive suite of AS-NMD analysis functions. Using this tool, we conducted a longitudinal analysis of gene expression in pluripotent stem cells undergoing induced neuronal differentiation. Our analysis uncovers hundreds of AS-NMD events with significant potential to regulate gene expression. Notably, this regulation is significantly overrepresented in specific functional groups of developmentally downregulated genes. Particularly strong association with gene downregulation is detected for alternative cassette exons stimulating NMD upon their inclusion into mature mRNA. By combining bioinformatic analyses with CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing and other experimental approaches we show that NMD-stimulating cassette exons regulated by the RNA-binding protein PTBP1 dampen the expression of their genes in developing neurons. We also provided evidence that the inclusion of NMD-stimulating cassette exons into mature mRNAs is temporally coordinated with NMD-independent gene repression mechanisms.Conclusions Our study provides an accessible workflow for the discovery and prioritization of AS-NMD targets. It further argues that the AS-NMD pathway plays a widespread role in developing neurons by facilitating the downregulation of functionally related non-neuronal genes.
Spatial transcriptomics technologies permit the study of the spatial distribution of RNA at near-single-cell resolution genome-wide. However, the feasibility of studying spatial allele-specific expression (ASE) from these data remains uncharacterized. Here, we introduce spASE, a computational framework for detecting and estimating spatial ASE. To tackle the challenges presented by cell type mixtures and a low signal to noise ratio, we implement a hierarchical model involving additive mixtures of spatial smoothing splines. We apply our method to allele-resolved Visium and Slide-seq from the mouse cerebellum and hippocampus and report new insight into the landscape of spatial and cell type-specific ASE therein.
