BackgroundEast African cichlid fishes have diversified in an explosive fashion, but the (epi)genetic basis of the phenotypic diversity of these fishes remains largely unknown. Although transposable elements (TEs) have been associated with phenotypic variation in cichlids, little is known about their transcriptional activity and epigenetic silencing. We set out to bridge this gap and to understand the interactions between TEs and their cichlid hosts.ResultsHere, we describe dynamic patterns of TE expression in African cichlid gonads and during early development. Orthology inference revealed strong conservation of TE silencing factors in cichlids, and an expansion of piwil1 genes in Lake Malawi cichlids, likely driven by PiggyBac TEs. The expanded piwil1 copies have signatures of positive selection and retain amino acid residues essential for catalytic activity. Furthermore, the gonads of African cichlids express a Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway that targets TEs. We define the genomic sites of piRNA production in African cichlids and find divergence in closely related species, in line with fast evolution of piRNA-producing loci.ConclusionsOur findings suggest dynamic co-evolution of TEs and host silencing pathways in the African cichlid radiations. We propose that this co-evolution has contributed to cichlid genomic diversity.
BackgroundFruit acidity and color are important quality attributes in peaches. Although there are some exceptions, blood-fleshed peaches typically have a sour taste. However, little is known about the genetic variations linking organic acid and color regulation in peaches.ResultsHere, we report a peach graph-based pangenome constructed from sixteen individual genome assemblies, capturing abundant structural variations and 82.3 Mb of sequences absent in the reference genome. Pangenome analysis reveals a long terminal repeat retrotransposon insertion in the promoter of the NAC transcription factor (TF) PpBL in blood-fleshed peaches, which enhances PpBL expression. Genome-wide association study identifies a significant association between PpBL and malate content. Silencing PpBL in peach fruit and ectopic overexpression of PpBL in tomatoes confirm that PpBL is a positive regulator of malate accumulation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that PpBL works synergistically with another NAC TF, PpNAC1, to activate the transcription of the aluminum-activated malate transporter PpALMT4, leading to increased malate content.ConclusionsThese findings, along with previous research showing that PpBL and PpNAC1 also regulate anthocyanin accumulation, explain the red coloration and sour taste in blood-fleshed peach fruits.
BackgroundIn humans and other mammals, the process of oogenesis initiates asynchronously in specific ovarian regions, leading to the localization of dormant and growing follicles in the cortex and medulla, respectively; however, the current understanding of this process remains insufficient.ResultsHere, we integrate single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and spatial transcriptomics (ST) to comprehend spatial-temporal gene expression profiles and explore the spatial organization of ovarian microenvironments during early oogenesis in pigs. Projection of the germ cell clusters at different stages of oogenesis into the spatial atlas unveils a "cortical to medullary (C-M)" distribution of germ cells in the developing porcine ovaries. Cross-species analysis between pigs and humans unveils a conserved C-M distribution pattern of germ cells during oogenesis, highlighting the utility of pigs as valuable models for studying human oogenesis in a spatial context. RNA velocity analysis with ST identifies the molecular characteristics and spatial dynamics of granulosa cell lineages originating from the cortical and medullary regions in pig ovaries. Spatial co-occurrence analysis and intercellular communication analysis unveils a distinct cell-cell communication pattern between germ cells and somatic cells in the cortex and medulla regions. Notably, in vitro culture of ovarian tissues verifies that intercellular NOTCH signaling and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins played crucial roles in initiating meiotic and oogenic programs, highlighting an underappreciated role of ovarian microenvironments in orchestrating germ cell fates.ConclusionsOverall, our work provides insight into the spatial characteristics of early oogenesis and the regulatory role of ovarian microenvironments in germ cell fate within a spatial context.
BackgroundThe DNA/H3K9 methylation and Polycomb-group proteins (PcG)-H3K27me3 silencing pathways have long been considered mutually exclusive and specific to transposable elements (TEs) and genes, respectively in mammals, plants, and fungi. However, H3K27me3 can be recruited to many TEs in the absence of DNA/H3K9 methylation machinery and sometimes also co-occur with DNA methylation.ResultsIn this study, we show that TEs can also be solely targeted and silenced by H3K27me3 in wild-type Arabidopsis plants. These H3K27me3-marked TEs not only comprise degenerate relics but also seemingly intact copies that display the epigenetic features of responsive PcG target genes as well as an active H3K27me3 regulation. We also show that H3K27me3 can be deposited on newly inserted transgenic TE sequences in a TE-specific manner indicating that silencing is determined in cis. Finally, a comparison of Arabidopsis natural accessions reveals the existence of a category of TEs-which we refer to as "bifrons"-that are marked by DNA methylation or H3K27me3 depending on the accession. This variation can be linked to intrinsic TE features and to trans-acting factors and reveals a change in epigenetic status across the TE lifespan.ConclusionsOur study sheds light on an alternative mode of TE silencing associated with H3K27me3 instead of DNA methylation in flowering plants. It also suggests dynamic switching between the two epigenetic marks at the species level, a new paradigm that might extend to other multicellular eukaryotes.
BackgroundStreptomyces is a highly diverse genus known for the production of secondary or specialized metabolites with a wide range of applications in the medical and agricultural industries. Several thousand complete or nearly complete Streptomyces genome sequences are now available, affording the opportunity to deeply investigate the biosynthetic potential within these organisms and to advance natural product discovery initiatives.ResultsWe perform pangenome analysis on 2371 Streptomyces genomes, including approximately 1200 complete assemblies. Employing a data-driven approach based on genome similarities, the Streptomyces genus was classified into 7 primary and 42 secondary Mash-clusters, forming the basis for comprehensive pangenome mining. A refined workflow for grouping biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) redefines their diversity across different Mash-clusters. This workflow also reassigns 2729 known BGC families to only 440 families, a reduction caused by inaccuracies in BGC boundary detections. When the genomic location of BGCs is included in the analysis, a conserved genomic structure, or synteny, among BGCs becomes apparent within species and Mash-clusters. This synteny suggests that vertical inheritance is a major factor in the diversification of BGCs.ConclusionsOur analysis of a genomic dataset at a scale of thousands of genomes refines predictions of BGC diversity using Mash-clusters as a basis for pangenome analysis. The observed conservation in the order of BGCs' genomic locations shows that the BGCs are vertically inherited. The presented workflow and the in-depth analysis pave the way for large-scale pangenome investigations and enhance our understanding of the biosynthetic potential of the Streptomyces genus.
BackgroundGenetic discontinuity represents abrupt breaks in genomic identity among species. Advances in genome sequencing have enhanced our ability to track and characterize genetic discontinuity in bacterial populations. However, exploring the degree to which bacterial diversity exists as a continuum or sorted into discrete and readily defined species remains a challenge in microbial ecology. Here, we aim to quantify the genetic discontinuity (delta\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\delta$$\end{document}) and investigate how this metric is related to ecology.ResultsWe harness a dataset comprising 210,129 genomes to systematically explore genetic discontinuity patterns across several distantly related species, finding clear breakpoints which vary depending on the taxa in question. By delving into pangenome characteristics, we uncover a significant association between pangenome saturation and genetic discontinuity. Closed pangenomes are associated with more pronounced breaks, exemplified by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Additionally, through a machine learning approach, we detect key features such as gene conservation patterns and functional annotations that significantly impact genetic discontinuity prediction.ConclusionsOur study clarifies bacterial genetic patterns and their ecological impacts, enhancing the delineation of species boundaries and deepening our understanding of microbial diversity.
Deciphering the link between tissue architecture and function requires methods to identify and interpret patterns in spatial arrangement of cells. We present SMORE, an approach to detect patterns in sequential arrangements of cells and examine their associated gene expression specializations. Applied to retina, brain, and embryonic tissue maps, SMORE identifies novel spatial motifs, including one that offers a new mechanism of action for type 1b bipolar cells. Structural signatures detected by SMORE also form a basis for classifying tissues. Together, our method provides a new framework for uncovering spatial complexity in tissue organization and offers novel insights into tissue function.
BackgroundGenetic variation in the non-recombining part of the human Y chromosome has provided important insight into the paternal history of human populations. However, a significant and yet unexplained branch length variation of Y chromosome lineages has been observed, notably amongst those that are highly diverged from the human reference Y chromosome. Understanding the origin of this variation, which has previously been attributed to changes in generation time, mutation rate, or efficacy of selection, is important for accurately reconstructing human evolutionary and demographic history.ResultsHere, we analyze Y chromosomes from present-day and ancient modern humans, as well as Neandertals, and show that branch length variation amongst human Y chromosomes cannot solely be explained by differences in demographic or biological processes. Instead, reference bias results in mutations being missed on Y chromosomes that are highly diverged from the reference used for alignment. We show that masking fast-evolving, highly divergent regions of the human Y chromosome mitigates the effect of this bias and enables more accurate determination of branch lengths in the Y chromosome phylogeny.ConclusionWe show that our approach allows us to estimate the age of ancient samples from Y chromosome sequence data and provide updated estimates for the time to the most recent common ancestor using the portion of the Y chromosome where the effect of reference bias is minimized.
BackgroundGenetic studies have associated thousands of enhancers with breast cancer (BC). However, the vast majority have not been functionally characterized. Thus, it remains unclear how BC-associated enhancers contribute to cancer. ResultsHere, we perform single-cell CRISPRi screens of 3513 regulatory elements associated with breast cancer to measure the impact of these regions on transcriptional phenotypes. Analysis of > 500,000 single-cell transcriptomes in two breast cancer cell lines shows that perturbation of BC-associated enhancers disrupts breast cancer gene programs. We observe BC-associated enhancers that directly or indirectly regulate the expression of cancer genes. We also find one-to-multiple and multiple-to-one network motifs where enhancers indirectly regulate cancer genes. Notably, multiple BC-associated enhancers indirectly regulate TP53. Comparative studies illustrate subtype specific functions between enhancers in ER + and ER - cells. Finally, we develop the pySpade package to facilitate analysis of single-cell enhancer screens. ConclusionsOverall, we demonstrate that enhancers form regulatory networks that link cancer genes in the genome, providing a more comprehensive understanding of the contribution of enhancers to breast cancer development.
