The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a genetically heterogeneous group of rare dominantly inherited neurodegenerative diseases characterized by progressive ataxia. The most common mutation seen across the SCAs is a CAG repeat expansion, causative for SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 12 and 17. We recently identified dysregulation of alternative splicing as a novel, presymptomatic transcriptomic hallmark in mouse models of SCAs 1, 3 and 7. In order to understand if dysregulation of alternative splicing is a transcriptomic feature of patient-derived cell models of CAG SCAs, we performed RNA sequencing and transcriptomic analysis in patient-derived fibroblast cell lines of SCAs 1, 3 and 7. We identified widespread and robust dysregulation of alternative splicing across all CAG expansion SCA lines investigated, with disease relevant pathways affected, such as microtubule-based processes, transcriptional regulation, and DNA damage and repair. Novel disease-relevant alternative splicing events were validated across patient-derived fibroblast lines from multiple CAG SCAs and CAG containing reporter cell lines. Together this study demonstrates that dysregulation of alternative splicing represents a novel and shared pathogenic process in CAG expansion SCA1, 3 and 7 and can potentially be used as a biomarker across patient models of this group of devastating neurodegenerative diseases.
Mutations in Cytosolic Carboxypeptidase-like Protein 5 (CCP5) are associated with vision loss in humans. To decipher the mechanisms behind CCP5-associated blindness, we generated a novel mouse model lacking CCP5. In this model, we found that increased tubulin glutamylation led to progressive cone-rod dystrophy, with cones showing a more pronounced and earlier functional loss than rod photoreceptors. The observed functional reduction was not due to cell death, levels, or the mislocalization of major phototransduction proteins. Instead, the increased tubulin glutamylation caused shortened photoreceptor axonemes and the formation of numerous abnormal membranous whorls that disrupted the integrity of photoreceptor outer segments (OS). Ultimately, excessive tubulin glutamylation led to the progressive loss of photoreceptors, affecting cones more severely than rods. Our results highlight the importance of maintaining tubulin glutamylation for normal photoreceptor function. Furthermore, we demonstrate that murine cone photoreceptors are more sensitive to disrupted tubulin glutamylation levels than rods, suggesting an essential role for axoneme in the structural integrity of the cone outer segment. This study provides valuable insights into the mechanisms of photoreceptor diseases linked to excessive tubulin glutamylation.
Alterations in Dp71 expression, the most ubiquitous dystrophin isoform, have been associated with patient survival across tumours. Intriguingly, in certain malignancies, Dp71 acts as a tumour suppressor, while manifesting oncogenic properties in others. This diversity could be explained by the expression of two Dp71 splice variants encoding proteins with distinct C-termini, each with specific properties. Expression of these variants has impeded the exploration of their unique roles. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we ablated the Dp71f variant with the alternative C-terminus in a sarcoma cell line not expressing the canonical C-terminal variant, and conducted molecular (RNAseq) and functional characterisation of the knockout cells. Dp71f ablation induced major transcriptomic alterations, particularly affecting the expression of genes involved in calcium signalling and ECM-receptor interaction pathways. The genome-scale metabolic analysis identified significant downregulation of glucose transport via membrane vesicle reaction (GLCter) and downregulated glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway. Functionally, these molecular changes corresponded with, increased calcium responses, cell adhesion, proliferation, survival under serum starvation and chemotherapeutic resistance. Knockout cells showed reduced GLUT1 protein expression, survival without attachment and their migration and invasion in vitro and in vivo were unaltered, despite increased matrix metalloproteinases release. Our findings emphasise the importance of alternative splicing of dystrophin transcripts and underscore the role of the Dp71f variant, which appears to govern distinct cellular processes frequently dysregulated in tumour cells. The loss of this regulatory mechanism promotes sarcoma cell survival and treatment resistance. Thus, Dp71f is a target for future investigations exploring the intricate functions of specific DMD transcripts in physiology and across malignancies.
Developmental and functional defects in the lymphatic system are responsible for primary lymphoedema (PL). PL is a chronic debilitating disease caused by increased accumulation of interstitial fluid, predisposing to inflammation, infections and fibrosis. There is no cure, only symptomatic treatment is available. Thirty-two genes or loci have been linked to PL, and another 22 are suggested, including Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF). We searched for HGF variants in 770 index patients from the Brussels PL cohort. We identified ten variants predicted to cause HGF loss-of-function (six nonsense, two frameshifts, and two splice-site changes; 1.3% of our cohort), and 14 missense variants predicted to be pathogenic in 17 families (2.21%). We studied co-segregation within families, mRNA stability for non-sense variants, and in vitro functional effects of the missense variants. Analyses of the mRNA of patient cells revealed degradation of the nonsense mutant allele. Reduced protein secretion was detected for nine of the 14 missense variants expressed in COS-7 cells. Stimulation of lymphatic endothelial cells with these 14 HGF variant proteins resulted in decreased activation of the downstream targets AKT and ERK1/2 for three of them. Clinically, HGF-associated PL was diverse, but predominantly bilateral in the lower limbs with onset varying from early childhood to adulthood. Finally, aggregation study in a second independent cohort underscored that rare likely pathogenic variants in HGF explain about 2% of PL. Therefore, HGF signalling seems crucial for lymphatic development and/or maintenance in human beings and HGF should be included in diagnostic genetic screens for PL.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the developed world. The alternative pathway (AP) of complement has been linked to the pathogenesis of AMD. In particular, rare variants (RVs) in the complement factor I (CFI) gene encoding the Factor I (FI) protein confer increased AMD risk. The prevalence of CFI RVs are well characterised in European AMD, however little is known about other populations. The Finnish population underwent genetic restriction events which have skewed allele frequencies in unexpected ways. A series of novel or enriched CFI RVs were identified in individuals with dry AMD from the Finnish Biobank Cooperative (FINBB), but the relationship between these genotypes and contribution to disease was unclear. Understanding how RVs impact the ability of FI to regulate the complement system is important to inform mechanistic understanding for how different genotypes contribute to disease development. To explore this a series of in vitro assays were used to functionally characterise the protein products of 3 CFI RVs enriched in FINBB dry AMD, where no prior data were available. The G547R variant resulted in almost complete loss of both classical pathway and AP regulatory potential. The c.982 g>a variant encoding G328R FI perturbed an exon splice enhancer site which resulted in exon skipping and a premature stop codon in vitro and low levels of FI in vivo. Despite detailed analysis no defect in levels or function was demonstrated in T107A. Functional characterization of all Finnish CFI RVs in the cohort allowed us to demonstrate that in Finnish dry AMD, collectively the type 1 CFI RVs (associated with FI haploinsufficiency) were significantly enriched with odds ratio (ORs) of 72.6 (95% confidence interval; CI 16.92 to 382.1). Meanwhile, type 2 CFI RVs (associated with FI dysfunction) collectively conferred a significant OR of 4.97 (95% CI 1.522 to 15.74), and non-impaired or normal CFI RV collectively conferred an of OR 3.19 (95% CI 2.410 to 4.191) although this was driven primarily by G261D. Overall, this study for the first time determined the ORs and functional effect for all CFI RVs within a Geographic Atrophy (GA) cohort, enabling calculations of combined risk scores that underline the risk conferred by type 1 and 2 CFI RVs in GA/AMD
Neanderthal and Denisovan hybridisation with modern humans has generated a non-random genomic distribution of introgressed regions, the result of drift and selection dynamics. Cross-species genomic incompatibility and more efficient removal of slightly deleterious archaic variants have been proposed as selection-based processes involved in the post-hybridisation purge of archaic introgressed regions. Both scenarios require the presence of functionally different alleles across Homo species onto which selection operated differently according to which populations hosted them, but only a few of these variants have been pinpointed so far. In order to identify functionally divergent archaic variants removed in humans, we focused on mitonuclear genes, which are underrepresented in the genomic landscape of archaic humans. We searched for non-synonymous, fixed, archaic-derived variants present in mitonuclear genes, rare or absent in human populations. We then compared the functional impact of archaic and human variants in the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Notably, a variant within the mitochondrial tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase 2 (YARS2) gene exhibited a significant decrease in respiratory activity and a substantial reduction of Cox2 levels, a proxy for mitochondrial protein biosynthesis, coupled with the accumulation of the YARS2 protein precursor and a lower amount of mature enzyme. Our work suggests that this variant is associated with mitochondrial functionality impairment, thus contributing to the purging of archaic introgression in YARS2. While different molecular mechanisms may have impacted other mitonuclear genes, our approach can be extended to the functional screening of mitonuclear genetic variants present across species and populations.
Variants of talin-1 (TLN1) have recently been linked with spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) a condition where a tear can form in the wall of a heart artery necessitating immediate medical care. One talin-1 variant, A2013T, has an extensive familial pedigree of SCAD, which led to the screening for, and identification of, further talin-1 variants in SCAD patients. Here we evaluated these variants with commonly used pathogenicity prediction tools and found it challenging to reliably classify SCAD-associated variants, even A2013T where the evidence of a causal role is strong. Using biochemical and cell biological methods, we show that SCAD-associated variants in talin-1, which would typically be classified as non-pathogenic, still cause a measurable impact on protein structure and cell behaviour, including cell movement and wound healing capacity. Together, this indicates that even subtle variants in central mechanosensitive adapter proteins, can give rise to significant health impacts at the individual level, suggesting the need for a possible re-evaluation of the scoring criteria for pathogenicity prediction for talin variants.
Genomic copy-number variations (CNVs) that can cause neurodevelopmental disorders often encompass many genes, which complicates our understanding of how individual genes within a CNV contribute to pathology. MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS or MRXSL in OMIM; OMIM#300260) is one such CNV disorder caused by duplications spanning methyl CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) and other genes on Xq28. Using an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) to normalize MECP2 dosage is sufficient to rescue abnormal neurological phenotypes in mouse models overexpressing MECP2 alone, implicating the importance of increased MECP2 dosage within CNVs of Xq28. However, because MDS CNVs span MECP2 and additional genes, we generated human neurons from multiple MDS patient-derived induced pluripotent cells (iPSCs) to evaluate the benefit of using an ASO against MECP2 in a MDS human neuronal context. Importantly, we identified a signature of genes that is partially and qualitatively modulated upon ASO treatment, pinpointed genes sensitive to MeCP2 function, and altered in a model of Rett syndrome, a neurological disorder caused by loss of MeCP2 function. Furthermore, the signature contained genes that are aberrantly altered in unaffected control human neurons upon MeCP2 depletion, revealing gene expression programs qualitatively sensitive to MeCP2 levels in human neurons. Lastly, ASO treatment led to a partial rescue of abnormal neuronal morphology in MDS neurons. All together, these data demonstrate that ASOs targeting MECP2 benefit human MDS neurons. Moreover, our study establishes a paradigm by which to evaluate the contribution of individual genes within a CNV to pathogenesis and to assess their potential as a therapeutic target.
Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures that protect the chromosome ends from degradation and fusion. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex essential to maintain the length of telomeres. Germline defects that lead to short and/or dysfunctional telomeres cause telomere biology disorders (TBDs), a group of rare and heterogeneous Mendelian diseases including pulmonary fibrosis, dyskeratosis congenita, and Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome. TPP1, a telomeric factor encoded by the gene ACD, recruits telomerase at telomere and stimulates its activity via its TEL-patch domain that directly interacts with TERT, the catalytic subunit of telomerase. TBDs due to TPP1 deficiency have been reported only in 11 individuals. We here report four unrelated individuals with a wide spectrum of TBD manifestations carrying either heterozygous or homozygous ACD variants consisting in the recurrent and previously described in-frame deletion of K170 (K170 increment ) and three novel missense mutations G179D, L184R, and E215V. Structural and functional analyses demonstrated that the four variants affect the TEL-patch domain of TPP1 and impair telomerase activity. In addition, we identified in the ACD gene several motifs associated with small deletion hotspots that could explain the recurrence of the K170 increment mutation. Finally, we detected in a subset of blood cells from one patient, a somatic TERT promoter-activating mutation that likely provides a selective advantage over non-modified cells, a phenomenon known as indirect somatic genetic rescue. Together, our results broaden the genetic and clinical spectrum of TPP1 deficiency and specify new residues in the TEL-patch domain that are crucial for length maintenance and stability of human telomeres in vivo.
Intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are genetically heterogeneous with hundreds of identified risk genes, most affecting only a few patients. Novel missense variants in these genes are being discovered as clinical exome sequencing is now routinely integrated into diagnosis, yet most of them are annotated as variants of uncertain significance (VUS). VUSs are a major roadblock in using patient genetics to inform clinical action. We developed a framework to characterize VUSs in Coiled-coil and C2 domain containing 1A (CC2D1A), a gene causing autosomal recessive ID with comorbid ASD in 40% of cases. We analyzed seven VUSs (p.Pro319Leu, p.Ser327Leu, p.Gly441Val, p.Val449Met, p.Thr580Ile, p.Arg886His and p.Glu910Lys) from four cases of individuals with ID and ASD. Variants were cloned and overexpressed in HEK293 individually and in their respective heterozygous combination. CC2D1A is a signaling scaffold that positively regulates PKA-CREB signaling by repressing phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D) to prevent cAMP degradation. After testing multiple parameters including direct interaction between PDE4D and CC2D1A, cAMP levels and CREB activation, we found that the most sensitive readout was CREB transcriptional activity using a luciferase assay. Compared to WT CC2D1A, five VUSs (p.Pro319Leu, p.Gly441Val, p.Val449Met, p.Thr580Ile, and p.Arg886His) led to significantly blunted response to forskolin induced CREB activation. This luciferase assay approach can be scaled up to annotate similar to 150 CC2D1A VUSs that are currently listed in ClinVar. Since CREB activation is a common denominator for multiple ASD/ID genes, our paradigm can also be adapted for their VUSs.
Hearing loss is the most common congenital sensory deficit worldwide and exhibits high genetic heterogeneity, making molecular diagnoses elusive for most individuals. Detecting novel mutations that contribute to hearing loss is crucial to providing accurate personalized diagnoses, tailored interventions, and improving prognosis. Copy number variants (CNVs) are structural mutations that are understudied, potential contributors to hearing loss. Here, we present the Abnormal Wobbly Gait (AWG) mouse, the first documented mutant exhibiting waltzer-like locomotor dysfunction, hyperactivity, circling behaviour, and profound deafness caused by a spontaneous CNV deletion in cadherin 23 (Cdh23). We were unable to identify the causative mutation through a conventional whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and variant detection pipeline, but instead found a linked variant in hexokinase 1 (Hk1) that was insufficient to recapitulate the AWG phenotype when introduced into C57BL/6J mice using CRISPR-Cas9. Investigating nearby deafness-associated genes revealed a pronounced downregulation of Cdh23 mRNA and a complete absence of full-length CDH23 protein, which is critical for the development and maintenance of inner ear hair cells, in whole head extracts from AWG neonates. Manual inspection of WGS read depth plots of the Cdh23 locus revealed a putative 10.4 kb genomic deletion of exons 11 and 12 that was validated by PCR and Sanger sequencing. This study underscores the imperative to refine variant detection strategies to permit identification of pathogenic CNVs easily missed by conventional variant calling to enhance diagnostic precision and ultimately improve clinical outcomes for individuals with genetically heterogenous disorders such as hearing loss.
Lynch syndrome (LS) is a common hereditary cancer syndrome caused by heterozygous germline pathogenic variants in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Splicing defect constitutes one of the major mechanisms for MMR gene inactivation. Using RT-PCR based RNA analysis, we investigated 24 potential spliceogenic variants in MMR genes and determined their pathogenicity based on refined splicing-related American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) criteria. Aberrant transcripts were confirmed in 19 variants and 17 of which were classified as pathogenic including 11 located outside of canonical splice sites. Most of these variants were previously reported in LS patients without mRNA splicing assessment. Thus, our study provides crucial evidence for pathogenicity determination, allowing for appropriate clinical follow-up. We also found that computational predictions were globally well correlated with RNA analysis results and the use of both SPiP and SpliceAI software appeared more efficient for splicing defect prediction.
The CEL gene encodes carboxyl ester lipase, a pancreatic digestive enzyme. CEL is extremely polymorphic due to a variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) located in the last exon. Single-base deletions within this VNTR cause the inherited disorder MODY8, whereas little is known about VNTR single-base insertions in pancreatic disease. We therefore mapped CEL insertion variants (CEL-INS) in 200 Norwegian patients with pancreatic neoplastic disorders. Twenty-eight samples (14.0%) carried CEL-INS alleles. Most common were insertions in repeat 9 (9.5%), which always associated with a VNTR length of 13 repeats. The combined INS allele frequency (0.078) was similar to that observed in a control material of 416 subjects (0.075). We performed functional testing in HEK293T cells of a set of CEL-INS variants, in which the insertion site varied from the first to the 12th VNTR repeat. Lipase activity showed little difference among the variants. However, CEL-INS variants with insertions occurring in the most proximal repeats led to protein aggregation and endoplasmic reticulum stress, which upregulated the unfolded protein response. Moreover, by using a CEL-INS-specific antibody, we observed patchy signals in pancreatic tissue from humans without any CEL-INS variant in the germline. Similar pancreatic staining was seen in knock-in mice expressing the most common human CEL VNTR with 16 repeats. CEL-INS proteins may therefore be constantly produced from somatic events in the normal pancreatic parenchyma. This observation along with the high population frequency of CEL-INS alleles strongly suggests that these variants are benign, with a possible exception for insertions in VNTR repeats 1-4.
Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are a group of rare genetic eye conditions that cause blindness. Despite progress in identifying genes associated with IRDs, improvements are necessary for classifying rare autosomal dominant (AD) disorders. AD diseases are highly heterogenous, with causal variants being restricted to specific amino acid changes within certain protein domains, making AD conditions difficult to classify. Here, we aim to determine the top-performing in-silico tools for predicting the pathogenicity of AD IRD variants. We annotated variants from ClinVar and benchmarked 39 variant classifier tools on IRD genes, split by inheritance pattern. Using area-under-the-curve (AUC) analysis, we determined the top-performing tools and defined thresholds for variant pathogenicity. Top-performing tools were assessed using genome sequencing on a cohort of participants with IRDs of unknown etiology. MutScore achieved the highest accuracy within AD genes, yielding an AUC of 0.969. When filtering for AD gain-of-function and dominant negative variants, BayesDel had the highest accuracy with an AUC of 0.997. Five participants with variants in NR2E3, RHO, GUCA1A, and GUCY2D were confirmed to have dominantly inherited disease based on pedigree, phenotype, and segregation analysis. We identified two uncharacterized variants in GUCA1A (c.428T>A, p.Ile143Thr) and RHO (c.631C>G, p.His211Asp) in three participants. Our findings support using a multi-classifier approach comprised of new missense classifier tools to identify pathogenic variants in participants with AD IRDs. Our results provide a foundation for improved genetic diagnosis for people with IRDs.
Mutations of mitochondrial (mt)DNA are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in humans, accounting for approximately two thirds of diagnosed mitochondrial disease. However, despite significant advances in technology since the discovery of the first disease-causing mtDNA mutations in 1988, the comprehensive diagnosis and treatment of mtDNA disease remains challenging. This is partly due to the highly variable clinical presentation linked to tissue-specific vulnerability that determines which organs are affected. Organ involvement can vary between different mtDNA mutations, and also between patients carrying the same disease-causing variant. The clinical features frequently overlap with other non-mitochondrial diseases, both rare and common, adding to the diagnostic challenge. Building on previous findings, recent technological advances have cast further light on the mechanisms which underpin the organ vulnerability in mtDNA diseases, but our understanding is far from complete. In this review we explore the origins, current knowledge, and future directions of research in this area.
Barth syndrome (BTHS) is a rare mitochondrial disease caused by pathogenic variants in the gene TAFAZZIN, which leads to abnormal cardiolipin (CL) metabolism on the inner mitochondrial membrane. Although TAFAZZIN is ubiquitously expressed, BTHS involves a complex combination of tissue specific phenotypes including cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, skeletal myopathy, and growth delays, with a relatively minimal neurological burden. To understand both the developmental and functional effects of TAZ-deficiency in different tissues, we generated isogenic TAZ knockout (TAZ-KO) and WT cardiomyocytes (CMs) and neural progenitor cells (NPCs) from CRISPR-edited induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). In TAZ-KO CMs we discovered evidence of dysregulated mitophagy including dysmorphic mitochondria and mitochondrial cristae, differential expression of key autophagy-associated genes, and an inability of TAZ-deficient CMs to properly initiate stress-induced mitophagy. In TAZ-deficient NPCs we identified novel phenotypes including a reduction in CIV abundance and CIV activity in the CIII2&CIV2 intermediate complex. Interestingly, while CL acyl chain manipulation was unable to alter mitophagy defects in TAZ-KO CMs, we found that linoleic acid or oleic acid supplementation was able to partially restore CIV abundance in TAZ-deficient NPCs. Taken together, our results have implications for understanding the tissue-specific pathology of BTHS and potential for tissue-specific therapeutic targeting. Moreover, our results highlight an emerging role for mitophagy in the cardiac pathophysiology of BTHS and reveal a potential neuron-specific bioenergetic phenotype.
Mutations in PRPH2 are a relatively common cause of sight-robbing inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs). Peripherin-2 (PRPH2) is a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein that structures the disk rim membranes of rod and cone outer segment (OS) organelles, and is required for OS morphogenesis. PRPH2 is noteworthy for its broad spectrum of disease phenotypes; both inter- and intra-familial heterogeneity have been widely observed and this variability in disease expression and penetrance confounds efforts to understand genotype-phenotype correlations and pathophysiology. Here we report the generation and initial characterization of a gene-edited animal model for PRPH2 disease associated with a nonsense mutation (c.1095:C>A, p.Y285X), which is predicted to truncate the peripherin-2 C-terminal domain. Young (P21) Prph2(Y285X/WT) mice developed near-normal photoreceptor numbers; however, OS membrane architecture was disrupted, OS protein levels were reduced, and in vivo and ex vivo electroretinography (ERG) analyses found that rod and cone photoreceptor function were each severely reduced. Interestingly, ERG studies also revealed that rod-mediated downstream signaling (b-waves) were functionally compensated in the young animals. This resiliency in retinal function was retained at P90, by which time substantial IRD-related photoreceptor loss had occurred. Altogether, the current studies validate a new mouse model for investigating PRPH2 disease pathophysiology, and demonstrate that rod and cone photoreceptor function and structure are each directly and substantially impaired by the Y285X mutation. They also reveal that Prph2 mutations can induce a functional compensation that resembles homeostatic plasticity, which can stabilize rod-derived signaling, and potentially dampen retinal dysfunction during some PRPH2-associated IRDs.
Lowe syndrome, a rare X-linked multisystem disorder presenting with major abnormalities in the eyes, kidneys, and central nervous system, is caused by mutations in OCRL gene (NG_008638.1). Encoding an inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase, OCRL catalyzes the hydrolysis of PI(4,5)P2 into PI4P. There are no effective targeted treatments for Lowe syndrome. Here, we demonstrate a novel gene therapy for Lowe syndrome in patient fibroblasts using an adenine base editor (ABE) that can efficiently correct pathogenic point mutations. We show that ABE8e-NG-based correction of a disease-causing mutation in a Lowe patient-derived fibroblast line containing R844X mutation in OCRL gene, restores OCRL expression at mRNA and protein levels. It also restores cellular abnormalities that are hallmarks of OCRL dysfunction, including defects in ciliogenesis, microtubule anchoring, alpha-actinin distribution, and F-actin network. The study indicates that ABE-mediated gene therapy is a feasible treatment for Lowe syndrome, laying the foundation for therapeutic application of ABE in the currently incurable disease.
Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have been conducted over the past decades to investigate the underlying genetic origin of neuropsychiatric diseases, such as schizophrenia (SCZ). While these studies demonstrated the significance of disease-phenotype associations, there is a pressing need to fully characterize the functional relevance of disease-associated genetic variants. Functional genetic loci can affect transcriptional and post-transcriptional phenotypes that may contribute to disease pathology. Here, we investigate the associations between genetic variation and RNA editing, splicing, and overall gene expression through identification of quantitative trait loci (QTL) in the CommonMind Consortium SCZ cohort. We find that editing QTL (edQTL), splicing QTL (sQTL) and expression QTL (eQTL) possess both unique and common gene targets, which are involved in many disease-relevant pathways, including brain function and immune response. We identified two QTL that fall into all three QTL categories (seedQTL), one of which, rs146498205, targets the lincRNA gene, RP11-156P1.3. In addition, we observe that the RNA binding protein AKAP1, with known roles in neuronal regulation and mitochondrial function, had enriched binding sites among edQTL, including the seedQTL, rs146498205. We conduct colocalization with various brain disorders and find that all QTL have top colocalizations with SCZ and related neuropsychiatric diseases. Furthermore, we identify QTL within biologically relevant GWAS loci, such as in ELA2, an important tRNA processing gene associated with SCZ risk. This work presents the investigation of multiple QTL types in parallel and demonstrates how they target both distinct and overlapping SCZ-relevant genes and pathways.
Riboflavin transporter deficiency (RTD) is a rare and progressive neurodegenerative disease resulting from the disruption of RFVT2- and RFVT3- mediated riboflavin transport caused by biallelic mutations in SLC52A2 and SLC52A3, respectively. The resulting impaired mitochondrial metabolism leads to sensorimotor neurodegeneration and symptoms including muscle weakness, respiratory difficulty, and sensorineural deafness. Although over 70% of patients with RTD improve following high-dose riboflavin supplementation, remaining patients either stabilise or continue to deteriorate. This may be due to the rapid excretion of central nervous system (CNS) riboflavin by organic anion transporter 3 (OAT-3), highlighting the need for alternative or supplemental RTD treatments. Probenecid is a promising therapeutic candidate for RTD due to its known inhibitory effect on OAT-3. Therefore, this study aimed to generate morpholino-mediated knockdowns of human SLC52A3 ortholog slc52a3 in zebrafish larvae for use in therapeutic screening of riboflavin and probenecid. Knockdown of slc52a3 resulted in an RTD-like phenotype indicative of altered neurodevelopment, hearing loss, and reduced mobility. This RTD-like phenotype overlaps with the phenotype of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of slc52a3 in zebrafish, is maintained following slc52a3 morpholino + p53 morpholino co-injection, and is rescued following slc52a3 morpholino + human SLC52A3 mRNA co-injection, indicating specificity of the knockdown. Riboflavin treatment alone ameliorates locomotor activity and hearing ability in slc52a3 morphants. Riboflavin and probenecid co-treatment provides an additional small benefit to hearing but not to locomotion. Our findings demonstrate that this model recapitulates both the RTD phenotype and the riboflavin-responsiveness of RTD patients, and possible therapeutic benefit conferred by probenecid warrants further investigation.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is a progressive and fatal neuromuscular disease. Cycles of myofibre degeneration and regeneration are hallmarks of the disease where immune cells infiltrate to repair damaged skeletal muscle. Benfotiamine is a lipid soluble precursor to thiamine, shown clinically to reduce inflammation in diabetic related complications. We assessed whether benfotiamine administration could reduce inflammation related dystrophic pathology. Benfotiamine (10 mg/kg/day) was fed to male mdx mice (n = 7) for 15 weeks from 4 weeks of age. Treated mice had an increased growth weight (5-7 weeks) and myofibre size at treatment completion. Markers of dystrophic pathology (area of damaged necrotic tissue, central nuclei) were reduced in benfotiamine mdx quadriceps. Grip strength was increased and improved exercise capacity was found in mdx treated with benfotiamine for 12 weeks, before being placed into individual cages and allowed access to an exercise wheel for 3 weeks. Global gene expression profiling (RNAseq) in the gastrocnemius revealed benfotiamine regulated signalling pathways relevant to dystrophic pathology (Inflammatory Response, Myogenesis) and fibrotic gene markers (Col1a1, Col1a2, Col4a5, Col5a2, Col6a2, Col6a2, Col6a3, Lum) towards wildtype levels. In addition, we observed a reduction in gene expression of inflammatory gene markers in the quadriceps (Emr1, Cd163, Cd4, Cd8, Ifng). Overall, these data suggest that benfotiamine reduces dystrophic pathology by acting on inflammatory and fibrotic gene markers and signalling pathways. Given benfotiamine's excellent safety profile and current clinical use, it could be used in combination with glucocorticoids to treat DMD patients.
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a heterogeneous rare autoimmune fibrosing disorder affecting connective tissue. The etiology of systemic sclerosis is largely unknown and many genes have been suggested as susceptibility loci of modest impact by genome-wide association study (GWAS). Multiple factors can contribute to the pathological process of the disease, which makes it more difficult to identify possible disease-causing genetic alterations. In this study, we have applied whole genome sequencing (WGS) in 101 indexed family trios, supplemented with transcriptome sequencing on cultured fibroblast cells of four patients and five family controls where available. Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and copy number variants (CNVs) were examined, with emphasis on de novo variants. We also performed enrichment test for rare variants in candidate genes previously proposed in association with systemic sclerosis. We identified 42 exonic and 34 ncRNA de novo SNV changes in 101 trios, from a total of over 6000 de novo variants genome wide. We observed higher than expected de novo variants in PRKXP1 gene. We also observed such phenomenon along with increased expression in patient group in NEK7 gene. Additionally, we also observed significant enrichment of rare variants in candidate genes in the patient cohort, further supporting the complexity/multi-factorial etiology of systemic sclerosis. Our findings identify new candidate genes including PRKXP1 and NEK7 for future studies in SSc. We observed rare variant enrichment in candidate genes previously proposed in association with SSc, which suggest more efforts should be pursued to further investigate possible pathogenetic mechanisms associated with those candidate genes.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a subset of small non-coding single-stranded RNA molecules involved in the regulation of post-transcriptional gene expression of a variety of transcript targets. Therefore altered miRNA expression may result in the dysregulation of key genes and biological pathways that has been reported with the onset and progression of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). ALS is marked by a progressive degeneration of motor neurons (MNs) present in the spinal cord, brain stem and motor cortex. Although the pathomechanism underlying molecular interactions of ALS remains poorly understood, alterations in RNA metabolism, including dysregulation of miRNA expression in familial as well as sporadic forms are still scarcely studied. In this study, we performed combined transcriptomic data and miRNA profiling in MN samples of the same samples of iPSC-derived MNs from SOD1- and TARDBP (TDP-43 protein)-mutant-ALS patients and healthy controls. We report a global upregulation of mature miRNAs, and suggest that differentially expressed (DE) miRNAs have a significant impact on mRNA-level in SOD1-, but not in TARDBP-linked ALS. Furthermore, in SOD1-ALS we identified dysregulated miRNAs such as miR-124-3p, miR-19b-3p and miR-218 and their potential targets previously implicated in important functional process and pathogenic pathways underlying ALS. These miRNAs may play key roles in the neuronal development and cell survival related functions in SOD1-ALS. Altogether, we provide evidence of miRNA regulated genes expression mainly in SOD1 rather than TDP43-ALS.
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is a safe and efficient gene delivery vehicle for gene therapies. However, its relatively small packaging capacity limits its use as a gene transfer vector. Here, we describe a strategy to deliver large genes that exceed the AAV's packaging capacity using up to four AAV vectors and the CRE-lox DNA recombination system. We devised novel lox sites by combining non-compatible and reaction equilibrium-modifying lox site variants. These lox sites facilitate sequence-specific and near-unidirectional recombination of AAV vector genomes, enabling efficient reconstitution of up to 16 kb of therapeutic genes in a pre-determined configuration. Using this strategy, we have developed AAV gene therapy vectors to deliver IFT140, PCDH15, CEP290, and CDH23 and demonstrate efficient production of full-length proteins in cultured mammalian cells and mouse retinas. Notably, AAV-IFT140 gene therapy vectors ameliorated retinal degeneration and preserved visual functions in an IFT140-associated retinitis pigmentosa mouse model. The CRE-lox approach described here provides a simple, flexible, and effective platform for generating AAV gene therapy vectors beyond AAV's packaging capacity.
Rationale Pathogenic (P)/likely pathogenic (LP) SMAD3 variants cause Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 3 (LDS3), which is characterized by arterial aneurysms, dissections and tortuosity throughout the vascular system combined with osteoarthritis.Objectives Investigate the impact of P/LP SMAD3 variants with functional tests on patient-derived fibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), to optimize interpretation of SMAD3 variants.Methods A retrospective analysis on clinical data from individuals with a P/LP SMAD3 variant and functional analyses on SMAD3 patient-derived VSMCs and SMAD3 patient-derived fibroblasts, differentiated into myofibroblasts.Results Individuals with dominant negative (DN) SMAD3 variant in the MH2 domain exhibited more major events (66.7% vs. 44.0%, P = 0.054), occurring at a younger age compared to those with haploinsufficient (HI) variants. The age at first major event was 35.0 years [IQR 29.0-47.0] in individuals with DN variants in MH2, compared to 46.0 years [IQR 40.0-54.0] in those with HI variants (P = 0.065). Fibroblasts carrying DN SMAD3 variants displayed reduced differentiation potential, contrasting with increased differentiation potential in HI SMAD3 variant fibroblasts. HI SMAD3 variant VSMCs showed elevated SMA expression and altered expression of alternative MYH11 isoforms. DN SMAD3 variant myofibroblasts demonstrated reduced extracellular matrix formation compared to control cell lines.Conclusion Distinguishing between P/LP HI and DN SMAD3 variants can be achieved by assessing differentiation potential, and SMA and MYH11 expression. The differences between DN and HI SMAD3 variant fibroblasts and VSMCs potentially contribute to the differences in disease manifestation. Notably, myofibroblast differentiation seems a suitable alternative in vitro test system compared to VSMCs.
Genome-wide association studies have uncovered mostly non-coding variants at over 60 genetic loci linked to susceptibility for age- related macular degeneration (AMD). To ascertain the causal gene at the PILRB/PILRA locus, we used a CRISPR strategy to produce germline deletions in the mouse paired immunoglobin-like type 2 receptor ( Pilr ) genes that encode highly related activating (PILRB) and inhibitory (PILRA) receptors. We show that a combined loss of Pilrb1 and Pilrb2, but not Pilra, leads to an early but relatively stationary defect as the electroretinography (ERG) amplitudes of Pilrb1/2-/-mice exhibit a marked reduction as early as postnatal day 15 and do not show additional significant decrease at 3 and 12-months. No alterations are evident in M & uuml;ller glia, microglia, bipolar, amacrine and horizontal cells based on immunohistochemistry using cell-type specific markers. PILRB immunostaining is specifically detected at the proximal part of photoreceptor outer segment. Reduced expression of select calcium-regulated phototransduction and synapse- associated proteins, including GCAP1 and 2, PDE6b, AIPL1, PSD95, and CTBP1 indicates dysregulation of calcium homeostasis as a possible mechanism of retinal phenotype in Pilrb1/2(-/-)mice. Our studies suggest a novel function of PILRB in retinal photoreceptors and an association of PILRB, but not PILRA, with AMD pathogenesis.
This study delves into the molecular intricacies of hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (HSCC), specifically focusing on the pivotal role played by ETS translocation variant 4 (ETV4) in aerobic glycolysis. The objective is to uncover new targets for early diagnosis and treatment of HSCC. ETV4 expression in HSCC tissues was rigorously examined, revealing its association with patient survival. Through comprehensive experimentation, we demonstrated that ETV4 activation promotes HSCC cell proliferation and invasion while inhibiting apoptosis. Furthermore, in vivo experiments confirmed the tumor-promoting effect of ETV4 activation. The study elucidated the binding of ETV4 to the NSUN2 promoter and its influence on PKM2 expression, thereby regulating glycolysis and cellular functions in HSCC.
Unlike other cancers with widespread screening (breast, colorectal, cervical, prostate, and skin), lung nodule biopsies for positive screenings have higher morbidity with clinical complications. Development of non-invasive diagnostic biomarkers could thereby significantly enhance lung cancer management for at-risk patients. Here, we leverage Mendelian Randomization (MR) to investigate the plasma proteome and metabolome for potential biomarkers relevant to lung cancer. Utilizing bidirectional MR and co-localization analyses, we identify novel associations, highlighting inverse relationships between plasma proteins SFTPB and KDELC2 in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and positive associations of TCL1A with lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) and CNTN1 with small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Additionally, our work reveals significant negative correlations between metabolites such as theobromine and paraxanthine, along with paraxanthine-related ratios, in both LUAD and LUSC. Conversely, positive correlations are found in caffeine/paraxanthine and arachidonate (20:4n6)/paraxanthine ratios with these cancer types. Through single-cell sequencing data of normal lung tissue, we further explore the role of lung tissue-specific protein SFTPB in carcinogenesis. These findings offer new insights into lung cancer etiology, potentially guiding the development of diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic approaches.
Speckled Protein 140 (SP140) is a chromatin reader with critical roles regulating immune cell transcriptional programs, and SP140 splice variants are associated with immune diseases including Crohn's disease, multiple sclerosis, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. SP140 expression is currently thought to be restricted to immune cells. However, by analyzing human transcriptomic datasets from a wide range of normal and cancer cell types, we found recurrent cancer-specific expression of SP140, driven by an alternative intronic promoter derived from an intronic endogenous retrovirus (ERV). The ERV belongs to the primate-specific LTR8B family and is regulated by oncogenic mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling. The ERV drives expression of multiple cancer-specific isoforms, including a nearly full-length isoform that retains all the functional domains of the full-length canonical isoform and is also localized within the nucleus, consistent with a role in chromatin regulation. In a fibrosarcoma cell line, silencing the cancer-specific ERV promoter of SP140 resulted in increased sensitivity to interferon-mediated cytotoxicity and dysregulation of multiple genes. Our findings implicate aberrant ERV-mediated SP140 expression as a novel mechanism contributing to immune gene dysregulation in a wide range of cancer cells.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a disorder with a large genetic component. Biallelic mutations of EIF2AK4, which encodes the kinase GCN2, are causal in two ultra-rare subtypes of PAH, pulmonary veno-occlusive disease and pulmonary capillary haemangiomatosis. EIF2AK4 variants of unknown significance have also been identified in patients with classical PAH, though their relationship to disease remains unclear. To provide patients with diagnostic information and enable family testing, the functional consequences of such rare variants must be determined, but existing computational methods are imperfect. We applied a suite of bioinformatic and experimental approaches to sixteen EIF2AK4 variants that had been identified in patients. By experimentally testing the functional integrity of the integrated stress response (ISR) downstream of GCN2, we determined that existing computational tools have insufficient sensitivity to reliably predict impaired kinase function. We determined experimentally that several EIF2AK4 variants identified in patients with classical PAH had preserved function and are therefore likely to be non-pathogenic. The dysfunctional variants of GCN2 that we identified could be subclassified into three groups: misfolded, kinase-dead, and hypomorphic. Intriguingly, members of the hypomorphic group were amenable to paradoxical activation by a type-1 1/2 GCN2 kinase inhibitor. This experiment approach may aid in the clinical stratification of EIF2AK4 variants and potentially identify hypomorophic alleles receptive to pharmacological activation.
Objectives: Hip shape is thought to be an important causal risk factor for hip osteoarthritis and fracture. We aimed to identify genetic determinants of hip shape and use these to assess causal relationships with hip osteoarthritis. Methods: Statistical hip shape modelling was used to derive 10 hip shape modes (HSMs) from DXA images in UK Biobank and Shanghai Changfeng cohorts (n( total) =43485). Genome-wide association study meta-analyses were conducted for each HSM. Two-sample Mendelian randomisation (MR) was used to estimate causal effects between HSM and hip osteoarthritis using hip fracture as a positive control. Results: Analysis of the first 10 HSMs identified 203 independent association signals (P < 5 x 10(-9)). Hip shape SNPs were also associated (P <2.5 x 10(-4)) with hip osteoarthritis (n = 26) and hip fracture (n =4). Fine mapping implicated SMAD3 and PLEC as candidate genes that may be involved in the development of hip shape and hip osteoarthritis. MR analyses suggested there was no causal effect between any HSM and hip osteoarthritis, however there was evidence that HSM2 (more obtuse neck-shaft angle) and HSM4 (wider femoral neck) have a causal effect on hip fracture (ORIVW method 1.27 [95% CI 1.12-1.44], P =1.79 x 10(-4) and OR IVW 0.74 [0.65-0.84], P = 7.60 x 10(-6) respectively). Conclusions: We report the largest hip shape GWAS meta-analysis that identifies hundreds of novel loci, some of which are also associated with hip osteoarthritis and hip fracture. MR analyses suggest hip shape may not cause hip osteoarthritis but is implicated in hip fractures. Consequently, interventions targeting hip shape in older adults to prevent hip osteoarthritis may prove ineffective.
Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a rare congenital neuromuscular disorder characterized by muscle weakness and hypotonia, slow gross motor development, and decreased respiratory function. Mutations in at least twelve genes, all of each encode proteins that are either components of the muscle thin filament or regulate its length and stability, have been associated with NM. Mutations in Nebulin (NEB), a giant filamentous protein localized in the sarcomere, account for more than 50% of NM cases. At present, there remains a lack of understanding of whether NEB genotype influences nebulin function and NM-patient phenotypes. In addition, there is a lack of therapeutically tractable models that can enable drug discovery and address the current unmet treatment needs of patients. To begin to address these gaps, here we have characterized five new zebrafish models of NEB-related NM. These mutants recapitulate most aspects of NEB-based NM, showing drastically reduced survival, defective muscle structure, reduced contraction force, shorter thin filaments, presence of electron-dense structures in myofibers, and thickening of the Z-disks. This study represents the first extensive investigation of an allelic series of nebulin mutants, and thus provides an initial examination in pre-clinical models of potential genotype-phenotype correlations in human NEB patients. It also represents the first utilization of a set of comprehensive outcome measures in zebrafish, including correlation between molecular analyses, structural and biophysical investigations, and phenotypic outcomes. Therefore, it provides a rich source of data for future studies exploring the NM pathomechanisms, and an ideal springboard for therapy identification and development for NEB-related NM.
Common variants in the MicroRNA 137 host gene MIR137HG and its adjacent gene DPYD have been associated with schizophrenia risk and the latest Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC). Genome-Wide Association Study on schizophrenia has confirmed and extended these findings. To elucidate the association of schizophrenia risk-associated SNPs in this genomic region, we examined the expression of both mature and immature transcripts of the miR-137 host gene (MIR137HG) in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC) of postmortem brain samples of donors with schizophrenia and psychiatrically-unaffected controls using qPCR and RNA-Seq approaches. No differential expression of miR-137, MIR137HG, or its transcripts was observed. Two schizophrenia risk-associated SNPs identified in the PGC study, rs11165917 (DLPFC: P = 2.0e-16; sgACC: P = 6.4e-10) and rs4274102 (DLPFC: P = 0.036; sgACC: P = 0.002), were associated with expression of the MIR137HG long non-coding RNA transcript MIR137HG-203 (ENST00000602672.2) in individuals of European ancestry. Carriers of the minor (risk) allele of rs11165917 had significantly lower expression of MIR137HG-203 compared with those carrying the major allele. However, we were unable to validate this result by short-read sequencing of RNA extracted from DLPFC or sgACC tissue. This finding suggests that immature transcripts of MIR137HG may contribute to genetic risk for schizophrenia.
Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures at the end of chromosomes that maintain their integrity. Mutations in genes coding for proteins involved in telomere protection and elongation produce diseases such as dyskeratosis congenita or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis known as telomeropathies. These diseases are characterized by premature telomere shortening, increased DNA damage and oxidative stress. Genetic diagnosis of telomeropathy patients has identified mutations in the genes TERT and TERC coding for telomerase components but the functional consequences of many of these mutations still have to be experimentally demonstrated. The activity of twelve TERT and five TERC mutants, five of them identified in Spanish patients, has been analyzed. TERT and TERC mutants were expressed in VA-13 human cells that express low telomerase levels and the activity induced was analyzed. The production of reactive oxygen species, DNA oxidation and TRF2 association at telomeres, DNA damage response and cell apoptosis were determined. Most mutations presented decreased telomerase activity, as compared to wild-type TERT and TERC. In addition, the expression of several TERT and TERC mutants induced oxidative stress, DNA oxidation, DNA damage, decreased recruitment of the shelterin component TRF2 to telomeres and increased apoptosis. These observations might indicate that the increase in DNA damage and oxidative stress observed in cells from telomeropathy patients is dependent on their TERT or TERC mutations. Therefore, analysis of the effect of TERT and TERC mutations of unknown function on DNA damage and oxidative stress could be of great utility to determine the possible pathogenicity of these variants.
Aminoacyl-transfer RiboNucleic Acid synthetases (ARSs) are essential enzymes that catalyze the attachment of each amino acid to their cognate tRNAs. Mitochondrial ARSs (mtARSs), which ensure protein synthesis within the mitochondria, are encoded by nuclear genes and imported into the organelle after translation in the cytosol. The extensive use of next generation sequencing (NGS) has resulted in an increasing number of variants in mtARS genes being identified and associated with mitochondrial diseases. The similarities between yeast and human mitochondrial translation machineries make yeast a good model to quickly and efficiently evaluate the effect of variants in mtARS genes. Genetic screening of patients with a clinical suspicion of mitochondrial disorders through a customized gene panel of known disease-genes, including all genes encoding mtARSs, led to the identification of missense variants in WARS2, NARS2 and RARS2. Most of them were classified as Variant of Uncertain Significance. We exploited yeast models to assess the functional consequences of the variants found in these genes encoding mitochondrial tryptophanyl-tRNA, asparaginyl-tRNA, and arginyl-tRNA synthetases, respectively. Mitochondrial phenotypes such as oxidative growth, oxygen consumption rate, Cox2 steady-state level and mitochondrial protein synthesis were analyzed in yeast strains deleted in MSW1, SLM5, and MSR1 (the yeast orthologues of WARS2, NARS2 and RARS2, respectively), and expressing the wild type or the mutant alleles. Pathogenicity was confirmed for most variants, leading to their reclassification as Likely Pathogenic. Moreover, the beneficial effects observed after asparagine and arginine supplementation in the growth medium suggest them as a potential therapeutic approach.
Since first publication of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association for Medical Pathology (ACMG/AMP) variant classification guidelines, additional recommendations for application of certain criteria have been released (https://clinicalgenome.org/docs/), to improve their application in the diagnostic setting. However, none have addressed use of the PS4 and PP4 criteria, capturing patient presentation as evidence towards pathogenicity. Application of PS4 can be done through traditional case-control studies, or "proband counting" within or across clinical testing cohorts. Review of the existing PS4 and PP4 specifications for Hereditary Cancer Gene Variant Curation Expert Panels revealed substantial differences in the approach to defining specifications. Using BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 as exemplar genes, we calibrated different methods proposed for applying the "PS4 proband counting" criterion. For each approach, we considered limitations, non-independence with other ACMG/AMP criteria, broader applicability, and variability in results for different datasets. Our findings highlight inherent overlap of proband-counting methods with ACMG/AMP frequency codes, and the importance of calibration to derive dataset-specific code weights that can account for potential between-dataset differences in ascertainment and other factors. Our work emphasizes the advantages and generalizability of logistic regression analysis over simple proband-counting approaches to empirically determine the relative predictive capacity and weight of various personal clinical features in the context of multigene panel testing, for improved variant interpretation. We also provide a general protocol, including instructions for data formatting and a web-server for analysis of personal history parameters, to facilitate dataset-specific calibration analyses required to use such data for germline variant classification.
Human cell line models, including the neuronal precursor line LUHMES, are important for investigating developmental transcriptional dynamics within imprinted regions, particularly the 15q11-q13 Angelman (AS) and Prader-Willi (PWS) syndrome locus. AS results from loss of maternal UBE3A in neurons, where the paternal allele is silenced by a convergent antisense transcript UBE3A-ATS, a lncRNA that terminates at PWAR1 in non-neurons. qRT-PCR analysis confirmed the exclusive and progressive increase in UBE3A-ATS in differentiating LUHMES neurons, validating their use for studying UBE3A silencing. Genome-wide transcriptome analyses revealed changes to 11 834 genes during neuronal differentiation, including the upregulation of most genes within the 15q11-q13 locus. To identify dynamic changes in chromatin loops linked to transcriptional activity, we performed a HiChIP validated by 4C, which identified two neuron-specific CTCF loops between MAGEL2-SNRPN and PWAR1-UBE3A. To determine if allele-specific differentially methylated regions (DMR) may be associated with CTCF loop anchors, whole genome long-read nanopore sequencing was performed. We identified a paternally hypomethylated DMR near the SNRPN upstream loop anchor exclusive to neurons and a paternally hypermethylated DMR near the PWAR1 CTCF anchor exclusive to undifferentiated cells, consistent with increases in neuronal transcription. Additionally, DMRs near CTCF loop anchors were observed in both cell types, indicative of allele-specific differences in chromatin loops regulating imprinted transcription. These results provide an integrated view of the 15q11-q13 epigenetic landscape during LUHMES neuronal differentiation, underscoring the complex interplay of transcription, chromatin looping, and DNA methylation. They also provide insights for future therapeutic approaches for AS and PWS.
Primary cilia are antenna-like structures protruding from the surface of various eukaryotic cells, and have distinct protein compositions in their membranes. This distinct protein composition is maintained by the presence of the transition zone (TZ) at the ciliary base, which acts as a diffusion barrier between the ciliary and plasma membranes. Defects in cilia and the TZ are known to cause a group of disorders collectively called the ciliopathies, which demonstrate a broad spectrum of clinical features, such as perinatally lethal Meckel syndrome (MKS), relatively mild Joubert syndrome (JBTS), and nonsyndromic nephronophthisis (NPHP). Proteins constituting the TZ can be grouped into the MKS and NPHP modules. The MKS module is composed of several transmembrane proteins and three soluble proteins. TMEM218 was recently reported to be mutated in individuals diagnosed as MKS and JBTS. However, little is known about how TMEM218 mutations found in MKS and JBTS affect the functions of cilia. In this study, we found that ciliary membrane proteins were not localized to cilia in TMEM218-knockout cells, indicating impaired barrier function of the TZ. Furthermore, the exogenous expression of JBTS-associated TMEM218 variants but not MKS-associated variants in TMEM218-knockout cells restored the localization of ciliary membrane proteins. In particular, when expressed in TMEM218-knockout cells, the TMEM218(R115H) variant found in JBTS was able to restore the barrier function of cells, whereas the MKS variant TMEM218(R115C) could not. Thus, the severity of symptoms of MKS and JBTS individuals appears to correlate with the degree of their ciliary defects at the cellular level.
Mutations in PSEN1 were first discovered as a cause of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in 1995, yet the mechanism(s) by which the mutations cause disease still remains unknown. The generation of novel mouse models assessing the effects of different mutations could aid in this endeavor. Here we report on transgenic mouse lines made with the Delta 440 PSEN1 mutation that causes AD with parkinsonism:- two expressing the un-tagged human protein and two expressing a HA-tagged version. Detailed characterization of these lines showed that Line 305 in particular, which expresses the untagged protein, develops age-dependent memory deficits and pathologic features, many of which are consistent with features found in AD. Key behavioral and physiological alterations found in the novel 305 line included an age-dependent deficit in spontaneous alternations in the Y-maze, a decrease in exploration of the center of an open field box, a decrease in the latency to fall on a rotarod, a reduction in synaptic strength and pair-pulse facilitation by electrophysiology, and profound alterations to cerebral blood flow regulation. The pathologic alterations found in the line included, significant neuronal loss in the hippocampus and cortex, astrogliosis, and changes in several proteins involved in synaptic and mitochondrial function, Ca2+ regulation, and autophagy. Taken together, these findings suggest that the transgenic lines will be useful for the investigation of AD pathogenesis.
Alternative polyadenylation (APA) is a major mechanism of post-transcriptional regulation that affects mRNA stability, localization and translation efficiency. Previous pan-cancer studies have revealed that APA is frequently disrupted in cancer and is associated with patient outcomes. Yet, little is known about cancer type-specific APA alterations. Here, we integrated RNA-sequencing data from a Korean cohort (GEO: GSE40419) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to comprehensively analyze APA alterations in lung adenocarcinomas (LUADs). Comparing expression levels of core genes involved in polyadenylation, we find that overall, the set of 28 of 31 genes are upregulated, with CSTF2 particularly upregulated. We observed broad and recurrent APA changes in LUAD growth- promoting genes. In addition, we find enrichment of APA events in genes associated with known LUAD pathways and an increased heterogeneity in polyadenylation (polyA) site usage of proliferation-associated genes. Upon further investigation, we report smoking- specific APA changes are also highly relevant to LUAD development. Overall, our in-depth analysis reveals APA as an important driver for the molecular and clinical features of lung adenocarcinoma.
Obesity and poverty disproportionally affect African American persons. Epigenetic mechanisms could partially explain the association between socioeconomic disadvantage and body mass index (BMI). We examined the extent to which epigenetic mechanisms mediate the effect of socioeconomic status (SES) on BMI. Using data from African American adults from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study (n = 2664, mean age = 57 years), education, income, and occupation were used to create a composite SES score at visit 1 (1987-1989). We conducted two methylation-wide association analyses to identify associations between SES (visit 1), BMI and cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites measured at a subsequent visit (1990-1995). We then utilized structural equation modeling (SEM) to test whether identified sites mediated the association between earlier SES and BMI in sex-stratified models adjusted for demographic and risk factor covariates. Independent replication and meta-analyses were conducted using the Jackson Heart Study (JHS, n = 874, mean age 51 years, 2000-2004). Three CpG sites near MAD1L1, KDM2B, and SOCS3 (cg05095590, cg1370865, and cg18181703) were suggestively associated (P-value < 1.3x10(-5)) in ARIC and at array-wide significance (P-value < 1.3x10(-7)) in a combined meta-analysis of ARIC with JHS. SEM of these three sites revealed significant indirect effects in females (P-value < 5.8x10(-3)), each mediating 7%-20% of the total effect of SES on BMI. Nominally significant indirect effects were observed for two sites near MAD1L1 and KDM2B in males (P-value < 3.4x10(-2)), mediating -17 and -22% of the SES-BMI effect. These results provide further evidence that epigenetic modifications may be a potential pathway through which SES may "get under the skin" and contribute to downstream health disparities.
Pathogenic variants in the titin gene (TTN) are known to cause a wide range of cardiac and musculoskeletal disorders, with skeletal myopathy mostly attributed to biallelic variants. We identified monoallelic truncating variants (TTNtv), splice site or internal deletions in TTN in probands with mild, progressive axial and proximal weakness, with dilated cardiomyopathy frequently developing with age. These variants segregated in an autosomal dominant pattern in 7 out of 8 studied families. We investigated the impact of these variants on mRNA, protein levels, and skeletal muscle structure and function. Results reveal that nonsense-mediated decay likely prevents accumulation of harmful truncated protein in skeletal muscle in patients with TTNtvs. Splice variants and an out-of-frame deletion induce aberrant exon skipping, while an in-frame deletion produces shortened titin with intact N- and C-termini, resulting in disrupted sarcomeric structure. All variant types were associated with genome-wide changes in splicing patterns, which represent a hallmark of disease progression. Lastly, RNA-seq studies revealed that GDF11, a member of the TGF-beta superfamily, is upregulated in diseased tissue, indicating that it might be a useful therapeutic target in skeletal muscle titinopathies.
Introduction Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) is a leading cause of blindness globally. Characterized by progressive retinal ganglion cell degeneration, the precise pathogenesis remains unknown. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have uncovered many genetic variants associated with elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), one of the key risk factors for POAG. We aimed to identify genetic and morphological variation that can be attributed to trabecular meshwork cell (TMC) dysfunction and raised IOP in POAG.Methods 62 genes across 55 loci were knocked-out in a primary human TMC line. Each knockout group, including five non-targeting control groups, underwent single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) for differentially-expressed gene (DEG) analysis. Multiplexed fluorescence coupled with CellProfiler image analysis allowed for single-cell morphological profiling.Results Many gene knockouts invoked DEGs relating to matrix metalloproteinases and interferon-induced proteins. We have prioritized genes at four loci of interest to identify gene knockouts that may contribute to the pathogenesis of POAG, including ANGPTL2, LMX1B, CAV1, and KREMEN1. Three genetic networks of gene knockouts with similar transcriptomic profiles were identified, suggesting a synergistic function in trabecular meshwork cell physiology. TEK knockout caused significant upregulation of nuclear granularity on morphological analysis, while knockout of TRIOBP, TMCO1 and PLEKHA7 increased granularity and intensity of actin and the cell-membrane.Conclusion High-throughput analysis of cellular structure and function through multiplex fluorescent single-cell analysis and scRNA-seq assays enabled the direct study of genetic perturbations at the single-cell resolution. This work provides a framework for investigating the role of genes in the pathogenesis of glaucoma and heterogenous diseases with a strong genetic basis.
Since its discovery as a causative gene of the Immunodeficiency with Centromeric instability and Facial anomalies syndrome, ZBTB24 has emerged as a key player in DNA methylation, immunity and development. By extensively analyzing ZBTB24 genomic functions in ICF-relevant mouse and human cellular models, we document here its multiple facets as a transcription factor, with key roles in immune response-related genes expression and also in early embryonic development. Using a constitutive Zbtb24 ICF-like mutant and an auxin- inducible degron system in mouse embryonic stem cells, we showed that ZBTB24 is recruited to centromeric satellite DNA where it is required to establish and maintain the correct DNA methylation patterns through the recruitment of DNMT3B. The ability of ZBTB24 to occupy centromeric satellite DNA is conserved in human cells. Together, our results unveiled an essential and underappreciated role for ZBTB24 at mouse and human centromeric satellite repeat arrays by controlling their DNA methylation and transcription status.
Purpose: In genome-wide association studies (GWAS), X chromosome (ChrX) variants are often not investigated. Sex-specific effects and ChrX-specific quality control (QC) are needed to examine these effects. Previous GWAS identified 52 autosomal variants associated with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) via the International AMD Genomics Consortium (IAMDGC), but did not analyze ChrX. Therefore, our goal was to investigate ChrX variants for association with AMD. Methods: We genotyped 29 629 non-Hispanic White (NHW) individuals (M/F:10404/18865; AMD12,087/14723) via a custom chip and imputed after ChrX-specific QC (XWAS 3.0) using the Michigan Imputation Server. Imputation generated 1 221 623 variants on ChrX. Age, informative PCs, and subphenotypes were covariates for logistic association analyses with Fisher's correction. Gene/pathway analyses were performed with VEGAS, GSEASNP, ICSNPathway, DAVID, and mirPath. Results: Logistic association on NHW individuals with sex correction identified variants in/near the genes SLITRK4, ARHGAP6, FGF13 and DMD associated with AMD (P < 1 x 10(-6),Fisher's combined-corrected). Association testing of the subphenotypes of choroidal neovascularization and geographic atrophy (GA), identified variants in DMD associated with GA (P < 1 x 10(-6), Fisher's combined-corrected). Via gene-based analysis with VEGAS, several genes were associated with AMD (P < 0.05, both truncated tail strength/truncated product P) including SLITRK4 and BHLHB9. Pathway analysis using GSEASNP and DAVID identified genes associated with nervous system development (FDR: P:0.02), and blood coagulation (FDR: P:0.03). Variants in the region of a microRNA (miR) were associated with AMD (P < 0.05, truncated tail strength/truncated product P). Via DIANA mirPath analysis, downstream targets of miRs showed association with brain disorders and fatty acid elongation (P < 0.05). A long noncoding RNA on ChrX near the DMD locus was also associated with AMD (P = 4 x 10(-7)). Epistatic analysis (t-statistic) for a quantitative trait of AMD vs control including covariates found a suggestive association in the XG gene (P = 2 x 10(-5)). Conclusions: Analysis of ChrX variation identifies several potential new locifor AMD risk and these variants nominate novel AMD pathways. Further analysis is needed to refine these results and to understand their biological significance and relationship with AMD development in worldwide populations.
Puumala virus (PUUV) infections can cause severe illnesses such as Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome in humans. However, human genetic risk factors contributing to disease severity are still poorly understood. Our goal was to elucidate genetic factors contributing to PUUV infections and understand the biological mechanisms underlying individual vulnerability to PUUV infections. Leveraging data from the FinnGen study, we conducted a genome-wide association study on severe Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome caused by PUUV with 2227 cases. We identified associations at the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) locus and ERAP1 with severe PUUV infection. HLA molecules are canonical mediators for immune recognition and response. ERAP1 facilitates immune system recognition and activation by cleaving viral proteins into smaller peptides which are presented to the immune system via HLA class I molecules. Notably, we identified that the lead variant (rs26653, OR = 0.84, P = 2.9 x 10-8) in the ERAP1 gene was a missense variant changing amino acid arginine to proline. From the HLA region, we showed independent and significant associations with both HLA class I and II genes. Furthermore, we showed independent associations with four HLA alleles with severe PUUV infection using conditional HLA fine mapping. The strongest association was found with the HLA-C*07:01 allele (OR = 1.54, P = 4.0 x 10-24) followed by signals at HLA-B*13:02, HLA-DRB1*01:01, and HLA-DRB1*11:01 alleles (P < 5 x 10-8). Our findings suggest an association of viral peptide processing with ERAP1 and antigen presentation through HLA alleles that may contribute to the development of severe PUUV disease.
The MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 (MRN) complex plays critical roles in cellular responses to DNA double-strand breaks. MRN is involved in end binding and processing, and it also induces cell cycle checkpoints by activating the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein kinase. Hypomorphic pathogenic variants in the MRE11, RAD50, or NBS1 genes cause autosomal recessive genome instability syndromes featuring variable degrees of dwarfism, neurological defects, anemia, and cancer predisposition. Disease-associated MRN alleles include missense and nonsense variants, and many cause reduced protein levels of the entire MRN complex. However, the dramatic variability in the disease manifestation of MRN pathogenic variants is not understood. We sought to determine if low protein levels are a significant contributor to disease sequelae and therefore generated a transgenic murine model expressing MRE11 at low levels. These mice display dramatic phenotypes including small body size, severe anemia, and impaired DNA repair. We demonstrate that, distinct from ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder caused by MRE11 pathogenic missense or nonsense variants, mice and cultured cells expressing low MRE11 levels do not display the anticipated defects in ATM activation. Our findings indicate that ATM signaling can be supported by very low levels of the MRN complex and imply that defective ATM activation results from perturbation of MRN function caused by specific hypomorphic disease mutations. These distinct phenotypic outcomes underline the importance of understanding the impact of specific pathogenic MRE11 variants, which may help direct appropriate early surveillance for patients with these complicated disorders in a clinical setting.
Claudin-25 (CLDN-25), also known as Claudin containing domain 1, is an uncharacterized claudin family member. It has less conserved amino acid sequences when compared to other claudins. It also has a very broad tissue expression profile and there is currently a lack of functional information from murine knockout models. Here, we report a de novo missense heterozygous variant in CLDN25 (c. 745G>C, p. A249P) found in a patient diagnosed with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like leukodystrophy and presenting with symptoms such as delayed motor development, several episodes of tonic absent seizures and generalized dystonia. The variant protein does not localize to the cell-cell borders where it would normally be expected to be expressed. Amino acid position 249 is located 4 amino acids from the C-terminal end of the protein where most claudin family members have a conserved binding motif for the key scaffolding protein ZO-1. However, CLDN-25 does not contain this motif. Here, we show that the C-terminal end of CLDN-25 is required for its junctional localization in a ZO-1 independent manner. The A249P mutant protein as well as a deletion mutant lacking its last 5 C-terminal amino acids also failed to localize to the cell-cell border in vitro. Intriguingly, cellular knockout of CLDN25, in vitro, appeared to increase the integrity of the tight junction between 2 contacting cells, while driving highly unusual increased movement of solutes between cells. We propose that the barrier function of CLDN-25 is akin to a decoy claudin, whereby decreasing its expression in "leaky" epithelial cells and endothelial cells will drive dynamic changes in the adhesion and interaction capacity of cell-cell contact points. While it remains unclear how this de novo CLDN-25 mutant induces leukodystrophy, our findings strongly suggest that this mutation induces haploinsufficiency of CLDN-25. Elucidating the function of this uncharacterized claudin protein will lead to a better understanding of the role of claudin proteins in health and disease.
Purpose: This study aimed to develop and validate a comprehensive polygenic risk score (PRS) for keratoconus, enhancing the predictive accuracy for identifying individuals at increased risk, which is crucial for preventing keratoconus-associated visual impairment such as post-Laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) ectasia. Methods: We applied a multi-trait analysis approach (MTAG) to genome-wide association study data on keratoconus and quantitative keratoconus-related traits and used this to construct PRS models for keratoconus risk using several PRS methodologies. We evaluated the predictive performance of the PRSs in two biobanks: Estonian Biobank (EstBB; 375 keratoconus cases and 17 902 controls) and UK Biobank (UKB: 34 keratoconus cases and 1000 controls). Scores were compared using the area under the curve (AUC) and odds ratios (ORs) for various PRS models. Results: The PRS models demonstrated significant predictive capabilities in EstBB, with the SBayesRC model achieving the highest OR of 2.28 per standard deviation increase in PRS, with a model containing age, sex and PRS showing good predictive accuracy (AUC = 0.72). In UKB, we found that adding the best-performing PRS to a model containing corneal measurements increased the AUC from 0.84 to 0.88 (P = 0.012 for difference), with an OR of 4.26 per standard deviation increase in the PRS. These models showed improved predictive capability compared to previous keratoconus PRS. Conclusion: The PRS models enhanced prediction of keratoconus risk, even with corneal measurements, showing potential for clinical use to identify individuals at high risk of keratoconus, and potentially help reduce the risk of post-LASIK ectasia.
Craniosynostosis, defined by premature fusion of one or multiple cranial sutures, is a common congenital defect affecting more than 1/2000 infants and results in restricted brain expansion. Single gene mutations account for 15%-20% of cases, largely as part of a syndrome, but the majority are nonsyndromic with complex underlying genetics. We hypothesized that the two noncoding genomic regions identified by a GWAS for craniosynostosis contain distal regulatory elements for the risk genes BMPER and BMP2. To identify such regulatory elements, we surveyed conserved noncoding sequences from both risk loci for enhancer activity in transgenic Danio rerio. We identified enhancers from both regions that direct expression to skeletal tissues, consistent with the endogenous expression of bmper and bmp2. For each locus, we also found a skeletal enhancer that also contains a sequence variant associated with craniosynostosis risk. We examined the activity of each enhancer during craniofacial development and found that the BMPER-associated enhancer is active in the restricted region of cartilage closely associated with frontal bone initiation. The same enhancer is active in mouse skeletal tissues, demonstrating evolutionarily conserved activity. Using enhanced yeast one-hybrid assays, we identified transcription factors that bind each enhancer and observed differential binding between alleles, implicating multiple signaling pathways. Our findings help unveil the genetic mechanism of the two craniosynostosis risk loci. More broadly, our combined in vivo approach is applicable to many complex genetic diseases to build a link between association studies and specific genetic mechanisms.
Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Respiratory Distress (SMARD1) is a lethal infantile disease, characterized by the loss of motor neurons leading to muscular atrophy, diaphragmatic paralysis, and weakness in the trunk and limbs. Mutations in IGHMBP2, a ubiquitously expressed DNA/RNA helicase, have been shown to cause a wide spectrum of motor neuron disease. Though mutations in IGHMBP2 are mostly associated with SMARD1, milder alleles cause the axonal neuropathy, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2S (CMT2S), and some null alleles are potentially a risk factor for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Variant heterogeneity studied using an allelic series can be informative in order to create a broad spectrum of models that better exhibit the human variation. We previously identified the nmd2J mouse model of SMARD1, as well as two milder CMT2S mouse models. Here, we used CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to create three new, more severe Ighmbp2 mouse models of SMARD1, including a null allele, a deletion of C495 (C495del) and a deletion of L362 (L362del). Phenotypic characterization of the IGHMBP2L362del homozygous mutants and IGHMBP2C495del homozygous mutants respectively show a more severe disease presentation than the previous nmd2J model. The IGHMBP2L362del mutants lack a clear denervation in the diaphragm while the IGHMBP2C495del mutants display a neurogenic diaphragmatic phenotype as observed in SMARD1 patients. Characterization of the Ighmbp2-null model indicated neo-natal lethality (median lifespan = 0.5 days). These novel strains expand the spectrum of SMARD1 models to better reflect the clinical continuum observed in the human patients with various IGHMBP2 recessive mutations.
Mutations in the Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor HAI-2, encoded by SPINT2, are responsible for the pathogenesis of syndromic congenital sodium diarrhea (SCSD), an intractable secretory diarrhea of infancy. Some of the mutations cause defects in the functionally required Kunitz domain 1 and/or subcellular targeting signals. Almost all SCSD patients, however, harbor SPINT2 missense mutations that affect the functionally less important Kunitz domain 2. How theses single amino acid substitutions inactivate HAI-2 was, here, investigated by the doxycycline-inducible expression of three of these mutants in HAI-2-knockout Caco-2 human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells. Examining protein expressed from these HAI-2 mutants reveals that roughly 50% of the protein is synthesized as disulfide-linked oligomers that lose protease inhibitory activity due to the distortion of the Kunitz domains by disarrayed disulfide bonding. Although the remaining protein is synthesized as monomers, its glycosylation status suggests that the HAI-2 monomer remains in the immature, lightly glycosylated form, and is not converted to the heavily glycosylated mature form. Heavily glycosylated HAI-2 possesses full anti-protease activity and appropriate subcellular targeting signals, including the one embedded in the complex-type N-glycan. As predicted, these HAI-2 mutants cannot suppress the excessive prostasin proteolysis caused by HAI-2 deletion. The oligomerization and glycosylation defects have also been observed in a colorectal adenocarcinoma line that harbors one of these SPINT2 missense mutations. Our study reveals that the abnormal protein folding and N-glycosylation can cause widespread HAI-2 inactivation in SCSD patents.
Many genes with distinct molecular functions have been linked to genetically heterogeneous amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), including SuperOxide Dismutase 1 (SOD1) and Valosin-Containing Protein (VCP). SOD1 converts superoxide to oxygen and hydrogen peroxide. VCP acts as a chaperon to regulate protein degradation and synthesis and various other cellular responses. Although the functions of these two genes differ, in the current report we show that overexpression of wild-type VCP in mice enhances lifespan and maintains the size of neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) of both male and female SOD1(G93A) mice, a well-known ALS mouse model. Although VCP exerts multiple functions, its regulation of ER formation and consequent protein synthesis has been shown to play the most important role in controlling dendritic spine formation and social and memory behaviors. Given that SOD1 mutation results in protein accumulation and aggregation, it may direct VCP to the protein degradation pathway, thereby impairing protein synthesis. Since we previously showed that the protein synthesis defects caused by Vcp deficiency can be improved by leucine supplementation, to confirm the role of the VCP-protein synthesis pathway in SOD1-linked ALS, we applied leucine supplementation to SOD1(G93A) mice and, similar to Vcp overexpression, we found that it extends SOD1(G93A )mouse lifespan. In addition, the phenotypes of reduced muscle strength and fewer NMJs of SOD1(G93A) mice are also improved by leucine supplementation. These results support the existence of crosstalk between SOD1 and VCP and suggest a critical role for protein synthesis in ASL. Our study also implies a potential therapeutic treatment for ALS.
Protein aggregation of alpha-synuclein (alpha S) is a genetic and neuropathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease (PD). Studies in the model nematode Caenorhabditis elegans suggested that variation of alpha S aggregation depends on the genetic background. However, which genes and genetic modifiers underlie individual differences in alpha S pathology remains unknown. To study the genotypic-phenotypic relationship of alpha S aggregation, we constructed a Recombinant Inbred Line (RIL) panel derived from a cross between genetically divergent strains C. elegans NL5901 and SCH4856, both harboring the human alpha S gene. As a first step to discover genetic modifiers 70 alpha S-RILs were measured for whole-genome gene expression and expression quantitative locus analysis (eQTL) were mapped. We detected multiple eQTL hot-spots, many of which were located on Chromosome V. To confirm a causal locus, we developed Introgression Lines (ILs) that contain SCH4856 introgressions on Chromosome V in an NL5901 background. We detected 74 genes with an interactive effect between alpha S and the genetic background, including the human p38 MAPK homologue pmk-1 that has previously been associated with PD. Together, we present a unique alpha S-RIL panel for defining effects of natural genetic variation on alpha S pathology, which contributes to finding genetic modifiers of PD.
Mitochondria are hubs of metabolic activity with a major role in ATP conversion by oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). The mammalian mitochondrial genome encodes 11 mRNAs encoding 13 OXPHOS proteins along with 2 rRNAs and 22 tRNAs, that facilitate their translation on mitoribosomes. Maintaining the internal production of core OXPHOS subunits requires modulation of the mitochondrial capacity to match the cellular requirements and correct insertion of particularly hydrophobic proteins into the inner mitochondrial membrane. The mitochondrial translation system is essential for energy production and defects result in severe, phenotypically diverse diseases, including mitochondrial diseases that typically affect postmitotic tissues with high metabolic demands. Understanding the complex mechanisms that underlie the pathologies of diseases involving impaired mitochondrial translation is key to tailoring specific treatments and effectively targeting the affected organs. Disease mutations have provided a fundamental, yet limited, understanding of mitochondrial protein synthesis, since effective modification of the mitochondrial genome has proven challenging. However, advances in next generation sequencing, cryoelectron microscopy, and multi-omic technologies have revealed unexpected and unusual features of the mitochondrial protein synthesis machinery in the last decade. Genome editing tools have generated unique models that have accelerated our mechanistic understanding of mitochondrial translation and its physiological importance. Here we review the most recent mouse models of disease pathogenesis caused by defects in mitochondrial protein synthesis and discuss their value for preclinical research and therapeutic development.
Types A and B Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) are inherited multisystem lysosomal storage disorders due to mutations in the SMPD1 gene. Respiratory dysfunction is a key hallmark of NPD, yet the mechanism for this is underexplored. SMPD1 encodes acid sphingomyelinase (ASM), which hydrolyses sphingomyelin to ceramide and phosphocholine. Here, we present a Drosophila model of ASM loss-of-function, lacking the fly orthologue of SMPD1, dASM, modelling several aspects of the respiratory pathology of NPD. dASM is expressed in the late-embryonic fly respiratory network, the trachea, and is secreted into the tracheal lumen. Loss of dASM results in embryonic lethality, and the tracheal lumen fails to fill normally with gas prior to eclosion. We demonstrate that the endocytic clearance of luminal constituents prior to gas-filling is defective in dASM mutants, and is coincident with autophagic, but not lysosomal defects, in late stage embryonic trachea. Finally, we show that although bulk sphingolipids are unchanged, dietary loss of lipids in combination with genetic and pharmacological block of ceramide synthesis rescues the airway gas-filling defects. We highlight myriocin as a potential therapeutic drug for the treatment of the developmental respiratory defects associated with ASM deficiency, and present a new NPD model amenable to genetic and pharmacological screens.
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a significant contributor to morbidity and mortality, with large disparities in incidence rates between Black and White Americans. Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) limited to variants discovered in genome-wide association studies in European-ancestry samples can identify European-ancestry individuals at high risk of VTE. However, there is limited evidence on whether high-dimensional PRS constructed using more sophisticated methods and more diverse training data can enhance the predictive ability and their utility across diverse populations. We developed PRSs for VTE using summary statistics from the International Network against Venous Thrombosis (INVENT) consortium genome-wide association studies meta-analyses of European- (71 771 cases and 1 059 740 controls) and African-ancestry samples (7482 cases and 129 975 controls). We used LDpred2 and PRS-CSx to construct ancestry-specific and multi-ancestry PRSs and evaluated their performance in an independent European- (6781 cases and 103 016 controls) and African-ancestry sample (1385 cases and 12 569 controls). Multi-ancestry PRSs with weights tuned in European-ancestry samples slightly outperformed ancestry-specific PRSs in European-ancestry test samples (e.g. the area under the receiver operating curve [AUC] was 0.609 for PRS-CSx_combinedEUR and 0.608 for PRS-CSxEUR [P = 0.00029]). Multi-ancestry PRSs with weights tuned in African-ancestry samples also outperformed ancestry-specific PRSs in African-ancestry test samples (PRS-CSxAFR: AUC = 0.58, PRS-CSx_combined AFR: AUC = 0.59), although this difference was not statistically significant (P = 0.34). The highest fifth percentile of the best-performing PRS was associated with 1.9-fold and 1.68-fold increased risk for VTE among European- and African-ancestry subjects, respectively, relative to those in the middle stratum. These findings suggest that the multi-ancestry PRS might be used to improve performance across diverse populations to identify individuals at highest risk for VTE.
Biallelic mutations in tetratricopeptide repeat domain 7A (TTC7A) give rise to intestinal and immune disorders. However, our understanding of the genotype-phenotype relationship is limited, because TTC7A variants are mostly compound heterozygous and the disease phenotypes are highly diverse. This study aims to clarify how different TTC7A variants impact the severity of intestinal epithelial disorders. We individually characterized the molecular and cellular consequences of 11 different TTC7A missense mutations in TTC7A knockout Caco-2 cells. We examined variant-specific RNA expression profiles, TTC7A protein abundance, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by using RNA sequencing and imaging flow cytometry. For six variants we detected no significant alterations on these assays, suggesting that protein function may not be severely compromised. However, for five variants we observed molecular phenotypes, with overlapping gene expression signatures between specific variants. Remarkably, the TTC7AE71K variant displayed a unique expression profile, along with reduced TTC7A RNA and protein expression, which set it apart from all other variants. The findings from this study offer a better understanding of the role of specific TTC7A variants in disease and provide a framework for the classification of the variants based on the severity of impact. We propose a classification system for TTC7A variants that could help diagnosis, guide future treatment decisions and may aid in developing effective molecular therapies for patients that carry specific TTC7A variants.
Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative genetic disorder caused by an expansion in the CAG repeat tract of the huntingtin (HTT) gene resulting in behavioural, cognitive, and motor defects. Current knowledge of disease pathogenesis remains incomplete, and no disease course-modifying interventions are in clinical use. We have previously reported the development and characterisation of the OVT73 transgenic sheep model of HD. The 73 polyglutamine repeat is somatically stable and therefore likely captures a prodromal phase of the disease with an absence of motor symptomatology even at 5-years of age and no detectable striatal cell loss. To better understand the disease-initiating events we have undertaken a single nuclei transcriptome study of the striatum of an extensively studied cohort of 5-year-old OVT73 HD sheep and age matched wild-type controls. We have identified transcriptional upregulation of genes encoding N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and kainate receptors in medium spiny neurons, the cell type preferentially lost early in HD. Further, we observed an upregulation of astrocytic glutamate uptake transporters and medium spiny neuron GABA(A) receptors, which may maintain glutamate homeostasis. Taken together, these observations support the glutamate excitotoxicity hypothesis as an early neurodegeneration cascade-initiating process but the threshold of toxicity may be regulated by several protective mechanisms. Addressing this biochemical defect early may prevent neuronal loss and avoid the more complex secondary consequences precipitated by cell death.
Inflammation biomarkers can provide valuable insight into the role of inflammatory processes in many diseases and conditions. Sequencing based analyses of such biomarkers can also serve as an exemplar of the genetic architecture of quantitative traits. To evaluate the biological insight, which can be provided by a multi-ancestry, whole-genome based association study, we performed a comprehensive analysis of 21 inflammation biomarkers from up to 38 465 individuals with whole-genome sequencing from the Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) program (with varying sample size by trait, where the minimum sample size was n = 737 for MMP-1). We identified 22 distinct single-variant associations across 6 traits-E-selectin, intercellular adhesion molecule 1, interleukin-6, lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 activity and mass, and P-selectin-that remained significant after conditioning on previously identified associations for these inflammatory biomarkers. We further expanded upon known biomarker associations by pairing the single-variant analysis with a rare variant set-based analysis that further identified 19 significant rare variant set-based associations with 5 traits. These signals were distinct from both significant single variant association signals within TOPMed and genetic signals observed in prior studies, demonstrating the complementary value of performing both single and rare variant analyses when analyzing quantitative traits. We also confirm several previously reported signals from semi-quantitative proteomics platforms. Many of these signals demonstrate the extensive allelic heterogeneity and ancestry-differentiated variant-trait associations common for inflammation biomarkers, a characteristic we hypothesize will be increasingly observed with well-powered, large-scale analyses of complex traits.
Given the high recurrence rate of kidney stones, surgical lithotripsy and stone removal are not the ultimate treatments for kidney stones. There's an urgent need to explore the genetic mechanisms behind the susceptibility to kidney stones and to identify potential targets for prevention, to reduce the renal damage caused by recurrent stone formation. In this study, we screened 4548 circulating proteins using proteome-wide Mendelian Randomization (MR) to find proteins with a causal relationship to kidney stone risk. Additionally, proteome-wide association study (PWAS) and colocalization analysis were used to validate and prioritize candidate proteins. Moreover, downstream analyses including single-cell analysis, enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI), and druggability analysis were conducted on the proteins causally related to kidney stones, to further explore the genetic mechanisms of susceptibility and the potential of proteins as drug targets. Ultimately, 22 target proteins associated with the risk of kidney stones were identified. Six plasma proteins (COLGALT1, CLMP, LECT1, ITIH1, CDHR3, CPLX2) were negatively correlated with kidney stone risk, while the genetic overexpression of 16 target proteins (GJA1, STOM, IRF9, F9, TMPRSS11D, ADH1B, SPINK13, CRYBB2, TNS2, DOCK9, OXSM, MST1, IL2, LMAN2, ITIH3, KLRF1) increased the risk of kidney stones. Based on the PWAS and colocalization analysis results, the 22 target proteins were classified into 3 tiers: IL2, CPLX2, and LMAN2 as tier 1 proteins with the most compelling evidence, MST1, ITIH1, and ITIH3 as tier 2 proteins, and the rest as tier 3 proteins. Enrichment analysis and PPI showed that target proteins mainly affect the occurrence of kidney stones through leukocyte activation and cell junction assembly. Druggability analysis suggested that IL2, MST1, and ITIH1 have potential as drug targets, and potential drugs were evaluated through molecular docking. In summary, this study employed multiple analytical methods to screen plasma proteins related to susceptibility to kidney stones, providing new insights into the genetic mechanisms of kidney stones and potential targets for treatment and prevention
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal degenerative muscle wasting disease caused by the loss of the structural protein dystrophin with secondary pathological manifestations including metabolic dysfunction, mood and behavioral disorders. In the mildly affected mdx mouse model of DMD, brief scruff stress causes inactivity, while more severe subordination stress results in lethality. Here, we investigated the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan degradation and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) metabolic pathway in mdx mice and their involvement as possible mediators of mdx stress-related pathology. We identified downregulation of the kynurenic acid shunt, a neuroprotective branch of the kynurenine pathway, in mdx skeletal muscle associated with attenuated peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1 alpha) transcriptional regulatory activity. Restoring the kynurenic acid shunt by skeletal muscle-specific PGC-1 alpha overexpression in mdx mice did not prevent scruff -induced inactivity, nor did abrogating extrahepatic kynurenine pathway activity by genetic deletion of the pathway rate-limiting enzyme, indoleamine oxygenase 1. We further show that reduced NAD+ production in mdx skeletal muscle after subordination stress exposure corresponded with elevated levels of NAD(+) catabolites produced by ectoenzyme cluster of differentiation 38 (CD38) that have been implicated in lethal mdx response to pharmacological beta-adrenergic receptor agonism. However, genetic CD38 ablation did not prevent mdx scruff-induced inactivity. Our data do not support a direct contribution by the kynurenine pathway or CD38 metabolic dysfunction to the exaggerated stress response of mdx mice. [Graphical Abstract]
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4A) regulates genes with roles in glucose metabolism and beta-cell development. Although pathogenic HNF4A variants are commonly associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1; HNF4A-MODY), rare phenotypes also include hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, renal Fanconi syndrome and liver disease. While the association of rare functionally damaging HNF1A variants with HNF1A-MODY and type 2 diabetes is well established owing to robust functional assays, the impact of HNF4A variants on HNF-4A transactivation in tissues including the liver and kidney is less known, due to lack of similar assays. Our aim was to investigate the functional effects of seven HNF4A variants, located in the HNF-4A DNA binding domain and associated with different clinical phenotypes, by various functional assays and cell lines (transactivation, DNA binding, protein expression, nuclear localization) and in silico protein structure analyses. Variants R85W, S87N and R89W demonstrated reduced DNA binding to the consensus HNF-4A binding elements in the HNF1A promoter (35, 13 and 9%, respectively) and the G6PC promoter (R85W similar to 10%). While reduced transactivation on the G6PC promoter in HepG2 cells was shown for S87N (33%), R89W (65%) and R136W (35%), increased transactivation by R85W and R85Q was confirmed using several combinations of target promoters and cell lines. R89W showed reduced nuclear levels. In silico analyses supported variant induced structural impact. Our study indicates that cell line specific functional investigations are important to better understand HNF4A-MODY genotype-phenotype correlations, as our data supports ACMG/AMP interpretations of loss-of-function variants and propose assay-specific HNF4A control variants for future functional investigations.
RNA methylation of N-6-methyladenosine (m(6)A) is emerging as a fundamental regulator of every aspect of RNA biology. RNA methylation directly impacts protein production to achieve quick modulation of dynamic biological processes. However, whether RNA methylation regulates mitochondrial function is not known, especially in neuronal cells which require a high energy supply and quick reactive responses. Here we show that m(6)A RNA methylation regulates mitochondrial function through promoting nuclear-encoded mitochondrial complex subunit RNA translation. Conditional genetic knockout of m(6)A RNA methyltransferase Mettl14 (Methyltransferase like 14) by Nestin-Cre together with metabolomic analysis reveals that Mettl14 knockout-induced m(6)A depletion significantly downregulates metabolites related to energy metabolism. Furthermore, transcriptome-wide RNA methylation profiling of wild type and Mettl14 knockout mouse brains by m(6)A-Seq shows enrichment of methylation on mitochondria-related RNA. Importantly, loss of m(6)A leads to a significant reduction in mitochondrial respiratory capacity and membrane potential. These functional defects are paralleled by the reduced expression of mitochondrial electron transport chain complexes, as well as decreased mitochondrial super-complex assembly and activity. Mechanistically, m(6)A depletion decreases the translational efficiency of methylated RNA encoding mitochondrial complex subunits through reducing their association with polysomes, while not affecting RNA stability. Together, these findings reveal a novel role for RNA methylation in regulating mitochondrial function. Given that mitochondrial dysfunction and RNA methylation have been increasingly implicate in neurodegenerative disorders, our findings not only provide insights into fundamental mechanisms regulating mitochondrial function, but also open up new avenues for understanding the pathogenesis of neurological diseases.
Mutations in methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2), such as the T158M, P152R, R294X, and R306C mutations, are responsible for most Rett syndrome (RTT) cases. These mutations often result in altered protein expression that appears to correlate with changes in the nuclear size; however, the molecular details of these observations are poorly understood. Using a C2C12 cellular system expressing human MeCP2-E1 isoform as well as mouse models expressing these mutations, we show that T158M and P152R result in a decrease in MeCP2 protein, whereas R306C has a milder variation, and R294X resulted in an overall 2.5 to 3 fold increase. We also explored the potential involvement of the MeCP2 PEST domains in the proteasome-mediated regulation of MeCP2. Finally, we used the R294X mutant to gain further insight into the controversial competition between MeCP2 and histone H1 in the chromatin context. Interestingly, in R294X, MeCP2 E1 and E2 isoforms were differently affected, where the E1 isoform contributes to much of the overall protein increase observed, while E2 decreases by half. The modes of MeCP2 regulation, thus, appear to be differently regulated in the two isoforms.
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a dominantly inherited multi-system disease caused by expanded CTG repeats in the 3 ' untranslated region of the dystrophia myotonica protein kinase (DMPK) gene. Similar to other repeat disorders, the expanded trinucleotide repeat is unstable and demonstrates a tendency to increase repeat size with age in affected tissues. DNA mismatch repair system is implicated in somatic instability. It has been demonstrated that DM1 patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (DM1-iPSCs) show repeat instability, in which involvement of mismatch repair proteins has been suggested. Here we identified ZNF850 as a novel CTG repeat expansion-related molecule in DM1-iPSCs. ZNF850 was downregulated in a DM1-iPSC clone whose CTG repeat is exceptionally stable. We found that RNAi-mediated ZNF850 downregulation in DM1-iPSCs significantly reduced the repeat expansion and resulting instability. In adult skeletal muscle tissue of DM1 patients, ZNF850 expression levels were positively correlated with the repeat size. Furthermore, we found that ZNF850 protein can bind to the expanded CTG repeat sequence, and is located in proximity to MutS beta components. These results suggest that ZNF850 might play a role in repeat instability in DM1 by recruiting MutS beta to the repeat sequence.
Biallelic mutations in Protein O-mannosyltransferase 1 (POMT1) are among the most common causes of a severe group of congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs) known as dystroglycanopathies. POMT1 is a glycosyltransferase responsible for the attachment of a functional glycan mediating interactions between the transmembrane glycoprotein dystroglycan and its binding partners in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Disruptions in these cell-ECM interactions lead to multiple developmental defects causing brain and eye malformations in addition to CMD. Removing Pomt1 in the mouse leads to early embryonic death due to the essential role of dystroglycan during placental formation in rodents. Here, we characterized and validated a model of pomt1 loss of function in the zebrafish showing that developmental defects found in individuals affected by dystroglycanopathies can be recapitulated in the fish. We also discovered that pomt1 mRNA provided by the mother in the oocyte supports dystroglycan glycosylation during the first few weeks of development. Muscle disease, retinal synapse formation deficits, and axon guidance defects can only be uncovered during the first week post fertilization by generating knock-out embryos from knock-out mothers. Conversely, maternal pomt1 from heterozygous mothers was sufficient to sustain muscle, eye, and brain development only leading to loss of photoreceptor synapses at 30 days post fertilization. Our findings show that it is important to define the contribution of maternal mRNA while developing zebrafish models of dystroglycanopathies and that offspring generated from heterozygous and knock-out mothers can be used to differentiate the role of dystroglycan glycosylation in tissue formation and maintenance.
Late-Onset Alzheimer's Disease (LOAD) is a heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorder with complex etiology and high heritability. Its multifactorial risk profile and large portions of unexplained heritability suggest the involvement of yet unidentified genetic risk factors. Here we describe the "whole person" genetic risk landscape of polygenic risk scores for 2218 traits in 2044 elderly individuals and test if novel eigen-PRSs derived from clustered subnetworks of single-trait PRSs can improve the prediction of LOAD diagnosis, rates of cognitive decline, and canonical LOAD neuropathology. Network analyses revealed distinct clusters of PRSs with clinical and biological interpretability. Novel eigen-PRSs (ePRS) from these clusters significantly improved LOAD-related phenotypes prediction over current state-of-the-art LOAD PRS models. Notably, an ePRS representing clusters of traits related to cholesterol levels was able to improve variance explained in a model of the brain-wide beta-amyloid burden by 1.7% (likelihood ratio test P = 9.02 x 10-7). All associations of ePRS with LOAD phenotypes were eliminated by the removal of APOE-proximal loci. However, our association analysis identified modules characterized by PRSs of high cholesterol and LOAD. We believe this is due to the influence of the APOE region from both PRSs. We found significantly higher mean SNP effects for LOAD in the intersecting APOE region SNPs. Combining genetic risk factors for vascular traits and dementia could improve current single-trait PRS models of LOAD, enhancing the use of PRS in risk stratification. Our results are catalogued for the scientific community, to aid in generating new hypotheses based on our maps of clustered PRSs and associations with LOAD-related phenotypes.
Disease risk prediction based on genomic sequence and transcriptional profile can improve disease screening and prevention. Despite identifying many disease-associated DNA variants, distinguishing deleterious non-coding DNA variations remains poor for most common diseases. In this study, we designed in vitro experiments to uncover the significance of occupancy and competitive binding between P53 and cMYC on common target genes. Analyzing publicly available ChIP-seq data for P53 and cMYC in embryonic stem cells showed that similar to 344-366 regions are co-occupied, and on average, two cis-overlapping motifs (CisOMs) per region were identified, suggesting that co-occupancy is evolutionarily conserved. Using U2OS and Raji cells untreated and treated with doxorubicin to increase P53 protein level while potentially reducing cMYC level, ChIP-seq analysis illustrated that around 16 to 922 genomic regions were co-occupied by P53 and cMYC, and substitutions of cMYC signals by P53 were detected post doxorubicin treatment. Around 187 expressed genes near co-occupied regions were altered at mRNA level according to RNA-seq data analysis. We utilized a computational motif-matching approach to illustrate that changes in predicted P53 binding affinity in CisOMs of co-occupied elements significantly correlate with alterations in reporter gene expression. We performed a similar analysis using SNPs mapped in CisOMs for P53 and cMYC from ChIP-seq data, and expression of target genes from GTEx portal. We found significant correlation between change in cMYC-motif binding affinity in CisOMs and altered expression. Our study brings us closer to developing a generally applicable approach to filter etiological non-coding variations associated with common diseases.
Genotype imputation is widely used in genome-wide association studies (GWAS). However, both the genotyping chips and imputation reference panels are dependent on next-generation sequencing (NGS). Due to the nature of NGS, some regions of the genome are inaccessible to sequencing. To date, there has been no complete evaluation of these regions and their impact on the identification of associations in GWAS remains unclear. In this study, we systematically assess the extent to which variants in inaccessible regions are underrepresented on genotyping chips and imputation reference panels, in GWAS results and in variant databases. We also determine the proportion of genes located in inaccessible regions and compare the results across variant masks defined by the 1000 Genomes Project and the TOPMed program. Overall, fewer variants were observed in inaccessible regions in all categories analyzed. Depending on the mask used and normalized for region size, only 4%-17% of the genotyped variants are located in inaccessible regions and 52 to 581 genes were almost completely inaccessible. From the Cooperative Health Research in South Tyrol (CHRIS) study, we present a case study of an association located in an inaccessible region that is driven by genotyped variants and cannot be reproduced by imputation in GRCh37. We conclude that genotyping, NGS, genotype imputation and downstream analyses such as GWAS and fine mapping are systematically biased in inaccessible regions, due to missed variants and spurious associations. To help researchers assess gene and variant accessibility, we provide an online application (https://gab.gm.eurac.edu).
Human mitochondrial DNA is one of the most simplified cellular genomes and facilitates compartmentalized gene expression. Within the organelle, there is no physical barrier to separate transcription and translation, nor is there evidence that quality control surveillance pathways are active to prevent translation on faulty mRNA transcripts. Mitochondrial ribosomes synthesize 13 hydrophobic proteins that require co-translational insertion into the inner membrane of the organelle. To maintain the integrity of the inner membrane, which is essential for organelle function, requires responsive quality control mechanisms to recognize aberrations in protein synthesis. In this review, we explore how defects in mitochondrial protein synthesis can arise due to the culmination of inherent mistakes that occur throughout the steps of gene expression. In turn, we examine the stepwise series of quality control processes that are needed to eliminate any mistakes that would perturb organelle homeostasis. We aim to provide an integrated view on the quality control mechanisms of mitochondrial protein synthesis and to identify promising avenues for future research.
The mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system produces the majority of energy required by cells. Given the mitochondrion's endosymbiotic origin, the OXPHOS machinery is still under dual genetic control where most OXPHOS subunits are encoded by the nuclear DNA and imported into mitochondria, while a small subset is encoded on the mitochondrion's own genome, the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The nuclear and mtDNA encoded subunits must be expressed and assembled in a highly orchestrated fashion to form a functional OXPHOS system and meanwhile prevent the generation of any harmful assembly intermediates. While several mechanisms have evolved in eukaryotes to achieve such a coordinated expression, this review will focus on how the translation of mtDNA encoded OXPHOS subunits is tailored to OXPHOS assembly.
The Northeastern region of India is considered a gateway for modern humans' dispersal throughout Asia. This region is a mixture of various ethnic and indigenous populations amalgamating multiple ancestries. One reason for such amalgamation is that, South Asia experienced multiple historic migrations from various parts of the world. A few examples explored genetically are Jews, Parsis and Siddis. Ahom is a dynasty that historically migrated to India during the 12th century. However, this putative migration has not been studied genetically at high resolution. Therefore, to validate this historical evidence, we genotyped autosomal data of the Modern Ahom population residing in seven sister states of India. Principal Component and Admixture analyses haave suggested a substantial admixture of the Ahom population with the local Tibeto-Burman populations. Moreover, the haplotype-based analysis has linked these Ahom individuals mainly with the Kusunda (a language isolated from Nepal) and Khasi (an Austroasiatic population of Meghalaya). Such unexpected presence of widespread population affinities suggests that Ahom mixed and assimilated a wide variety of Trans-Himalayan populations inhabiting this region after the migration. In summary, we observed a significant deviation of Ahom from their ancestral homeland (Thailand) and extensive admixture and assimilation with the local South Asian populations.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused by low levels of the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein. Even though SMN is ubiquitously expressed, the disease selectively affects motor neurons, leading to progressive muscle weakness. Even among motor neurons, certain motor units appear more clinically resistant to SMA. To quantitatively survey selective resistance, we studied extensive neuromuscular autopsies of Type I SMA patients and age-matched controls. We found highly divergent degrees of degeneration of neighboring motor units, even within individual cranial nerves or a single anatomical area such as the neck. Examination of a Type I SMA patient maintained on life support for 17 years found that most muscles were atrophied, but the diaphragm was strikingly preserved. Nevertheless, some resistant human muscles with preserved morphology displayed nearly complete conversion to slow Type I myofibers. Remarkably, a similar pattern of selective resistance was observed in the SMN Delta 7 mouse model. Overall, differential motor unit vulnerability in human Type I SMA suggests the existence of potent, motor unit-specific disease modifiers. Mechanisms that confer selective resistance to SMA may represent therapeutic targets independent of the SMN protein, particularly in patients with neuromuscular weakness refractory to current treatments.
Trisomy of human chromosome 21 (T21) gives rise to Down syndrome (DS), the most frequent live-born autosomal aneuploidy. T21 triggers genome-wide transcriptomic alterations that result in multiple atypical phenotypes with highly variable penetrance and expressivity in individuals with DS. Many of these phenotypes, including atypical neurodevelopment, emerge prenatally. To enable in vitro analyses of the cellular and molecular mechanisms leading to the neurological alterations associated with T21, we created and characterized a panel of genomically diverse T21 and euploid induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). We subsequently differentiated these iPSCs to generate a panel of neural progenitor cells (NPCs). Alongside characterizing genotype effects from T21, we found that T21 NPCs showed inter-individual variability in growth rates, oxidative stress, senescence characteristics, and gene and protein expression. Pathway enrichment analyses of T21 NPCs identified vesicular transport, DNA repair, and cellular response to stress pathways. These results demonstrate T21-associated variability at the cellular level and suggest that cell lines from individuals with DS should not solely be analyzed as a homogenous population. Examining large cohorts of genetically diverse samples may more fully reveal the effects of aneuploidy on transcriptomic and phenotypic characteristics in T21 cell types.
Rare genetic respiratory disease has an incidence rate of more than 1:2500 live births in Northern Europe and carries significant disease burden. Early diagnosis improves outcomes, but many individuals remain without a confident genetic diagnosis. Improved and expanded molecular testing methods are required to improve genetic diagnosis rates and thereby improve clinical outcomes. Using primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) as an exemplar rare genetic respiratory disease, we developed a standardized method to identify pathogenic variants using whole transcriptome RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) of nasal epithelial cells cultured at air-liquid interface (ALI). The method was optimized using cells from healthy volunteers, and people with rhino-pulmonary disease but no diagnostic indication of PCD. We validated the method using nasal epithelial cells from PCD patients with known genetic cause. We then assessed the ability of RNA-seq to identify pathogenic variants and the disease mechanism in PCD likely patients but in whom DNA genetic testing was inconclusive. The majority of 49 targeted PCD genes were optimally identified in RNA-seq data from nasal epithelial cells grown for 21 days at ALI culture. Four PCD-likely patients without a previous genetic diagnosis received a confirmed genetic diagnosis from the findings of the RNA-seq data. We demonstrate the clinical potential of RNA-seq of nasal epithelial cells to identify variants in individuals with genetically unsolved PCD. This uplifted genetic diagnosis should improve genetic counselling, enables family cascade screening, opens the door to potential personalised treatment and care approaches. This methodology could be implemented in other rare lung diseases such as cystic fibrosis.
This study explored the roles of methionine adenosyltransferase 2A (MAT2A) and tripartite motif containing 25 (TRIM25) in the progression of thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA). The TAA model was established based on the beta-aminopropionitrile method. The effects of MAT2A on thoracic aortic lesions and molecular levels were analyzed by several pathological staining assays (hematoxylin-eosin, Verhoeff-Van Gieson, TUNEL) and molecular biology experiments (qRT-PCR, Western blot). Angiotensin II (Ang-II) was used to induce injury in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in vitro. The effects of MAT2A, shMAT2A, shTRIM25 and/or Wnt inhibitor (IWR-1) on the viability, apoptosis and protein expressions of VSMCs were examined by CCK-8, Annexin V-FITC/PI and Western blot assays. In TAA mice, overexpression of MAT2A alleviated thoracic aortic injury, inhibited the aberrant expressions of aortic contractile proteins and dedifferentiation markers, and blocked the activation of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. In Ang-II-induced VSMCs, up-regulation of MAT2A increased cellular activity and repressed the expression of beta-catenin protein. TRIM25 knockdown promoted activity of VSMCs, inhibited apoptosis, and blocked the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway activation by binding to MAT2A. IWR-1 partially counteracted the regulatory effects of shMAT2A. Collectively, TRIM25 destabilises the mRNA of MAT2A to activate Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and ultimately exacerbate TAA injury.
The NC_000006.12: g.34887814C>G variant in TAF11 was identified as a potential functional variant in a Chinese pedigree including two non-syndromic cleft lip only (NSCLO) cases. Applying Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP), Electrophoretic mobility shift and super-shift assays, we found that the mutant G allele recruited more STAT1 and STAT3, and increased the expression of TAF11. RNA sequencing, GO and KEGG pathway enrichment, ChIP and dual-luciferase reporter assays revealed that TAF11 downregulated CDH1 and CTNND1 in the cell adhesion pathway by binding to their promoter regions and inhibiting transcriptional activities. Alcian blue staining, time-lapse photography, whole-mount in situ hybridization, phospho-Histone H3 immunofluorescence and TUNEL assays indicated that TAF11 and taf11 overexpression (TAF11(OE) and taf11(OE), respectively) contributed to disturbed migration of cranial neural crest cells and abnormal craniofacial development, as well as increased death and deformity rates in zebrafish. In conclusion, a functionally relevant TAF11 variant, affecting cell migration via modulating CDH1 and CTNND1, was associated with etiology of NSCLO.
Gastric cancer (GC) is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths globally, necessitating the identification of novel therapeutic targets. This study investigates the roles of MATN3 and ASPN in GC progression via the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway. Analysis of the Cancer Genome Atlas-Stomach Adenocarcinoma (TCGA-STAD) dataset revealed that both MATN3 and ASPN are significantly upregulated in GC tissues and correlate with poor patient survival. Protein-protein interaction and co-expression analyses confirmed a direct interaction between MATN3 and ASPN, suggesting their synergistic role in EMT activation. Functional assays demonstrated that MATN3 promotes GC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, while its knockdown inhibits these malignant behaviors and induces apoptosis. ASPN overexpression further amplified these oncogenic effects. In vivo, studies in a mouse model corroborated that co-overexpression of MATN3 and ASPN enhances tumor growth and metastasis. These findings highlight the MATN3-ASPN axis as a potential therapeutic target in GC, offering new insights into the molecular mechanisms driving GC progression.
The regulation of gamma-globin expression is crucial due to its beneficial effects on diseases like beta-thalassemia and sickle cell disease. B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11A (BCL11A) is a significant suppressor of gamma-globin, and microRNAs (miRNAs) targeting BCL11A have been shown to alleviate this suppression. In our previous high-throughput sequencing, we identified an 11.32-fold increase in miR-129-5p expression in beta-thalassemia patients. However, the regulatory mechanisms of miR-129-5p in the context of erythroid differentiation remain to be elucidated. Our study aimed to elucidate the role of miR-129-5p in gamma-globin regulation and erythropoiesis. We measured miR-129-5p levels in peripheral blood from beta-thalassemia major and intermedia patients. Fluorescence in situ hybridization, dual-luciferase reporter assays, miRNA pull down assays and western blot analyses were conducted to examine the effects of miR-129-5p on gamma-globin expression and BCL11A repression. Cell proliferation, apoptosis, and erythroid differentiation were assessed using cell counting kit-8, Wright-Giemsa, and benzidine staining, and flow cytometry assays. The expression levels of miR-129-5p were significantly elevated in beta-thalassemia patients and positively correlated with gamma-globin synthesis while negatively correlating with liver damage. miR-129- 5p enhanced gamma-globin gene expression in K562 and HUDEP-2 cells by effectively repressing BCL11A. Overexpression of miR-129-5p inhibited cell proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest at the G1/G0 phase, promoted apoptosis and stimulated erythroid differentiation and maturation. Conversely, inhibition of miR-129-5p produced opposite cellular effects. miR-129-5p acts as a positive regulator of erythroid differentiation and gamma-globin synthesis. It offers a promising miRNA target for activating the gamma-globin gene and reducing ineffective erythropoiesis in beta-thalassemia patients.
Cancer development involves a complex interplay between genetic and epigenetic factors, with emerging evidence highlighting the pivotal role of competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) networks in regulating gene expression. However, the influence of ceRNA networks by aberrant DNA methylation remains incompletely understood. In our study, we proposed DMceNet, a computational method to characterize the effects of DNA methylation on ceRNA regulatory mechanisms and apply it across eight prevalent cancers. By integrating methylation and transcriptomic data, we constructed methylation-driven ceRNA networks and identified a dominant role of lncRNAs within these networks in two key ways: (i) 17 cancer-shared differential methylation lncRNAs (DMlncs), including PVT1 and CASC2, form a Common Cancer Network (CCN) affecting key pathways such as the G2/M checkpoint, and (ii) 24 cancer-specific DMlncs construct unique ceRNA networks for each cancer type. For instance, in LUAD and STAD, hypomethylation drives DMlncs like PCAT6 and MINCR, disrupting the Wnt signaling pathway and apoptosis. We further investigated the characteristics of these methylation-driven ceRNA networks at the cellular level, revealing how methylation-driven dysregulation varies across distinct cell populations within the tumor microenvironment. Our findings also demonstrate the prognostic potential of cancer-specific ceRNA relationships, highlighting their relevance in predicting patient survival outcomes. This integrated transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis provides new insights into cancer biology and regulatory mechanisms.
More than 60 monogenic genes mutated in steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) have been identified. Our previous study found that mutations in nucleoporin 160 kD (NUP160) are implicated in SRNS. The NUP160 gene encodes a component of the nuclear pore complex. Recently, two siblings with homozygous NUP160 mutations presented with SRNS and a nervous system disorder. However, replication of nephrotic syndrome (NS)-associated phenotypes in a mammalian model following loss of Nup160 is needed to prove that NUP160 mutations cause SRNS. Here, we generated a podocyte-specific Nup160 knockout (Nup160podKO) mouse model using CRISPR/Cas9 and Cre/loxP technologies. We investigated NS-associated phenotypes in these Nup160podKO mice. We verified efficient abrogation of Nup160 in Nup160podKO mice at both the DNA and protein levels. We showed that Nup160podKO mice develop typical signs of NS. Nup160podKO mice exhibited progression of proteinuria to average albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) levels of 15.06 +/- 2.71 mg/mg at 26 weeks, and had lower serum albumin levels of 13.13 +/- 1.34 g/l at 30 weeks. Littermate control mice had urinary ACR mean values of 0.03 mg/mg and serum albumin values of 22.89 +/- 0.34 g/l at the corresponding ages. Further, Nup160podKO mice exhibited glomerulosclerosis compared with littermate control mice. Podocyte-specific Nup160 knockout in mice led to NS and glomerulosclerosis. Thus, our findings strongly support that mutations in NUP160 cause SRNS. The newly generated Nup160podKO mice are a reliable mammalian model for future study of the pathogenesis of NUP160-associated SRNS.
alpha 9-nAChR, a subtype of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, is significantly overexpressed in female breast cancer tumor tissues compared to normal tissues. Previous studies have proposed that specific single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CHRNA9 (alpha 9-nAChR) gene are associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in interaction with smoking. The study conducted a breast cancer risk assessment of the alpha 9-nAChR SNP rs10009228 (NM_017581.4:c.1325A > G) in the Taiwanese female population, including 308 breast cancer patients and 198 healthy controls revealed that individuals with the heterozygous A/G or A/A wild genotype have an increased susceptibility to developing breast cancer in the presence of smoking compared to carriers of the G/G variant genotype. Our investigation confirmed the presence of this missense variation, resulting in an alteration of the amino acid sequence from asparagine (N442) to serine (S442) to facilitate phosphorylation within the alpha 9-nAchR protein. Additionally, overexpression of N442 (A/A) in breast cancer cells significantly enhanced cell survival, migration, and cancer stemness compared to S442 (G/G). Four-line triple-negative breast cancer patient-derived xenograft (TNBC-PDX) models with distinct alpha 9-nAChR rs10009228 SNP genotypes (A/A, A/G, G/G) further demonstrated that chronic nicotine exposure accelerated tumor growth through sustained activation of the alpha 9-nAChR downstream oncogenic AKT/ERK/STAT3 pathway, particularly in individuals with the A/G or A/A genotype. Collectively, our study established the links between genetic variations in alpha 9-nAChR and smoking exposure in promoting breast tumor development. This emphasizes the need to consider gene-environment interactions carefully while developing effective breast cancer prevention and treatment strategies.
Gaucher disease (GD) is caused by biallelic GBA1/Gba1 mutations that encode defective glucocerebrosidase (GCase). Progranulin (PGRN, encoded by GRN/Grn) is a modifier of GCase, but the interplay between PGRN and GCase, specifically GBA1/Gba1 mutations, contributing to GD severity is unclear. Mouse models were developed with various dosages of Gba1 D409V mutation against the PGRN deficiency (Grn-/-) [Grn-/-;Gba1D409V/WT (PG9Vwt), Grn-/-;Gba1D409V/D409V (PG9V), Grn-/-;Gba1D409V/Null (PG9VN)]. Disease progression in those mouse models was characterized by biochemical, pathological, transcriptomic, and neurobehavioral analyses. Compared to PG9Vwt, Grn-/-;Gba1WT/Null and Grn-/- mice that had a higher level of GCase activity and undetectable pathologies, homozygous or hemizygous D409V in PG9V or PG9VN, respectively, resulted in profound inflammation and neurodegeneration. PG9VN mice exhibited much earlier onset, shorter life span, tissue fibrosis, and more severe phenotypes than PG9V mice. Glycosphingolipid accumulation, inflammatory responses, lysosomal-autophagy dysfunction, microgliosis, retinal gliosis, as well as alpha-Synuclein increases were much more pronounced in PG9VN mice. Neurodegeneration in PG9VN was characterized by activated microglial phagocytosis of impaired neurons and programmed cell death due to necrosis and, possibly, pyroptosis. Brain transcriptomic analyses revealed the intrinsic relationship between D409V dosage, and the degree of altered gene expression related to lysosome dysfunction, microgliosis, and neurodegeneration in GD, suggesting the disease severity is dependent on a GCase activity threshold related to Gba1 D409V dosage and loss of PGRN. These findings contribute to a deeper understanding of GD pathogenesis by elucidating additional underlying mechanisms of interplay between PGRN and Gba1 mutation dosage in modulating GCase function and disease severity in GD and GBA1-associated neurodegenerative diseases.
This investigation aims to screen ischemic stroke (IS)-related hub genes of central post-stroke pain (CPSP) from public databases and predict their potential roles through bioinformatics analysis to better interpret CPSP in IS. First, based on differential analysis, Venn analysis, and enrichment analyses, we identified 13 differently expressed genes in CPSP (CPSP-DEGs) related to the TNF signaling pathway, Vascular smooth muscle contraction, and IL-17 signaling pathway. Subsequently, through screening and analysis of the PPI network constructed by the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING) database, we obtained 3 CPSP-related hub genes (CD163, MMP9, and ARG1). They were all highly expressed in the IS group, exhibiting good diagnostic performance, with area under curve (AUC) value > 0.85. The immune-related analysis demonstrated that the infiltration levels of various immune cells in the IS group and the normal group were substantially different. In addition, by utilizing some online websites, we not only predicted some microRNAs (miRNAs) and transcription factors (TFs) that may target hub genes but also mined small molecular drugs that may target differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in IS. In conclusion, this project first investigated the role of CPSP-related genes in IS and identified 3 hub genes. At the same time, we predicted some miRNAs, TFs, and candidate drugs that may target hub genes. Our research uncovered the potential mechanism of CPSP-related genes in IS from multiple perspectives. Furthermore, it also laid a research foundation for the future study of the mechanisms of IS disease.
Investigating the sevoflurane-induced perturbation in the differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) into neural stem cells (mNSCs), our study delineates a novel SIRT1/PRRX1/DRD2/PKM2/NRF2 axis as a key player in this intricate process. Sevoflurane treatment hindered mESC differentiation, evidenced by altered expression patterns of pluripotency and neural lineage markers. Mechanistically, sevoflurane downregulated Sirt1, setting in motion a signaling cascade. Sevoflurane may inhibit PKM2 dimerization and NRF2 signaling pathway activation by inhibiting the expression of SIRT1 and its downstream genes Prrx1 and DRD2, ultimately inhibiting mESCs differentiation into mNSCs. These findings contribute to our understanding of the molecular basis of sevoflurane-induced neural toxicity, presenting a potential avenue for therapeutic intervention in sevoflurane-induced perturbation in the differentiation of mESCs into mNSCs by modulating the SIRT1/PRRX1/DRD2/PKM2/NRF2 axis.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by low levels of the ubiquitously expressed Survival Motor Neuron (SMN) protein, leading to progressive muscle weakness and atrophy. Skeletal muscle satellite cells play a crucial role in muscle fiber maintenance, repair, and remodelling. While the effects of SMN depletion in muscle are well documented, its precise role in satellite cell function remains largely unclear. Using the Smn(2B/-) mouse model, we investigated SMN-depleted satellite cell biology through single fiber culture studies. Myofibers from Smn(2B/-) mice were smaller in size, shorter in length, had reduced myonuclear domain size, and reduced sub-synaptic myonuclear clusters-all suggesting impaired muscle function and integrity. These changes were accompanied by a reduction in the number of myonuclei in myofibers from Smn(2B/-) mice across all disease stages examined. Although the number of satellite cells in myofibers was significantly reduced, those remaining retained their capacity for myogenic activation and proliferation. These findings support the idea that a dysregulated myogenic process could be occurring as early in muscle stem cells during muscle formation and maturation in SMA. Targeting those pathways could offer additional options for combinatorial therapies for SMA.
The effectiveness of drug treatments is profoundly influenced by individual responses, which are shaped by gene expression variability, particularly within pharmacogenes. Leveraging single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data, our study explores the extent of expression variability among pharmacogenes in a wide array of cell types across eight different human tissues, shedding light on their impact on drug responses. Our findings broaden the established link between variability in pharmacogene expression and drug efficacy to encompass variability at the cellular level. Moreover, we unveil a promising approach to enhance drug efficacy prediction. This is achieved by leveraging a combination of cross-cell and cross-individual pharmacogene expression variation measurements. Our study opens avenues for more precise forecasting of drug performance, facilitating tailored and more effective treatments in the future.
Observational studies have reported a bidirectional correlation between nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the shared genetic basis between the two conditions remains unclear. Using genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary data from European-ancestry populations, we examined the cross-trait genetic correlation and identified genomic overlaps and shared risk loci. We employed a latent causal variable model and Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis to infer causal relationships. Colocalization analysis and conditional/conjunctional false discovery rate (condFDR/conjFDR) were used to identify genomic overlaps and shared risk loci. Two-step MR analysis was utilized to identify potential mediators. We observed a strong positive genomic correlation between NAFLD and T2D (rg = 0.652, P = 5.67 x 10-6) and identified tissue-specific transcriptomic correlations in the pancreas, liver, skeletal muscle, subcutaneous adipose, and blood. Genetic enrichment was observed in NAFLD conditional on associations with T2D and vice versa, indicating significant polygenic overlaps. We found robust evidence for the causal effect of NAFLD on T2D, particularly insulin-related T2D, rather than vice versa. Colocalization analysis identified shared genomic regions between NAFLD and T2D, including GCKR, FTO, MAU2-TM6SF2, and PNPLA3-SAMM50. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol and insulin were partly mediated the association between NAFLD and T2D. These findings unveil a close genetic link between NAFLD and T2D, shedding light on the biological mechanisms connecting NAFLD progression to T2D.
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a heterogeneous multisystemic disease caused by a CTG repeat expansion in DMPK. Transcription of the expanded allele produces toxic CUG repeat RNA that sequesters the MBNL family of alternative splicing (AS) regulators into ribonuclear foci, leading to pathogenic mis-splicing. To identify genetic modifiers of toxic CUG RNA levels and the spliceopathy, we performed a genome-scale siRNA screen using an established HeLa DM1 repeat-selective screening platform. We unexpectedly identified core spliceosomal proteins as a new class of modifiers that rescue the spliceopathy in DM1. Modest knockdown of one of our top hits, SNRPD2, in DM1 fibroblasts and myoblasts, significantly reduces DMPK expression and partially rescues MBNL-regulated AS dysfunction. While the focus on the DM1 spliceopathy has centered around the MBNL proteins, our work reveals an unappreciated role for MBNL:spliceosomal protein stoichiometry in modulating the spliceopathy, revealing new biological and therapeutic avenues for DM1.
Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is an autoimmune skin disorder characterized by the loss of cell cohesion, with the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and lysine demethylase 1A (KDM1A) playing critical roles in its pathogenesis. This study aimed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind PV, focusing on the function of HDAC1 and KDM1A in disease onset and progression. Based on in vitro and in vivo PV models, we observed a significant increase in HDAC1 mRNA and protein levels in skin tissues of PV patients. Inhibition of HDAC1 ameliorated cell damage and reduced the loss of cell cohesion in human epidermal keratinocytes (HEKs) induced by PV-IgG. Our findings suggest that HDAC1 regulates KDM1A expression through deacetylation, with a notable deficiency in KDM1A expression in PV. Overexpression of KDM1A mitigated cell damage and cohesion loss. The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway serves as a downstream executor of the HDAC1/KDM1A axis. Inhibiting HDAC1 and increasing KDM1A expression suppressed ERK phosphorylation, reducing PV-related apoptosis. These insights provide a new perspective on treating PV, highlighting the therapeutic potential of targeting HDAC1 expression. The regulatory mechanism of the HDAC1/KDM1A/ERK axis offers crucial clues for understanding PV pathogenesis and developing novel treatments.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), which results from the deletion or/and mutation in the SMN1 gene, is an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder that leads to weakness and muscle atrophy. SMN2 is a paralogous gene of SMN1. SMN2 copy number affects the severity of SMA, but its role in patients treated with disease modifying therapies is unclear. The most appropriate individualized treatment for SMA has not yet been determined. Here, we reported a case of SMA type I with normal breathing and swallowing function. We genetically confirmed that this patient had a compound heterozygous variant: one deleted SMN1 allele and a novel splice mutation c.628-3T>G in the retained allele, with one SMN2 copy. Patient-derived sequencing of 4 SMN1 cDNA clones showed that this intronic single transversion mutation results in an alternative exon (e)5 3 ' splice site, which leads to an additional 2 nucleotides (AG) at the 5 ' end of e5, thereby explaining why the patient with only one copy of SMN2 had a mild clinical phenotype. Additionally, a minigene assay of wild type and mutant SMN1 in HEK293T cells also demonstrated that this transversion mutation induced e5 skipping. Considering treatment cost and goals of avoiding pain caused by injections and starting treatment as early as possible, risdiplam was prescribed for this patient. However, the patient showed remarkable clinical improvements after treatment with risdiplam for 7 months despite carrying only one copy of SMN2. This study is the first report on the treatment of risdiplam in a patient with one SMN2 copy in a real-world setting. These findings expand the mutation spectrum of SMA and provide accurate genetic counseling information, as well as clarify the molecular mechanism of careful genotype-phenotype correlation of the patient.
The dystrophin-glycoprotein complex (DGC) plays a crucial role in maintaining the structural integrity of the plasma membrane and the neuromuscular junction. In this study, we investigated the impact of the deficiency of alpha-dystrobrevin (alpha dbn), a component of the DGC, on the homeostasis of intracellular organelles, specifically mitochondria and the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). In alpha dbn deficient muscles, we observed a significant increase in the membrane-bound ATP synthase complex levels, a marker for mitochondria in oxidative muscle fiber types compared to wild-type. Furthermore, examination of muscle fibers deficient in alpha dbn using electron microscopy revealed profound alterations in the organization of mitochondria and the SR within certain myofibrils of muscle fibers. This included the formation of hyper-branched intermyofibrillar mitochondria with extended connections, an extensive network spanning several myofibrils, and a substantial increase in the number/density of subsarcolemmal mitochondria. Concurrently, in some cases, we observed significant structural alterations in mitochondria, such as cristae loss, fragmentation, swelling, and the formation of vacuoles and inclusions within the mitochondrial matrix cristae. Muscles deficient in alpha dbn also displayed notable alterations in the morphology of the SR, along with the formation of distinct anomalous concentric SR structures known as whorls. These whorls were prevalent in alpha dbn-deficient mice but were absent in wild-type muscles. These results suggest a crucial role of the DGC alpha dbn in regulating intracellular organelles, particularly mitochondria and the SR, within muscle cells. The remodeling of the SR and the formation of whorls may represent a novel mechanism of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in muscle cells.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disease, is reported to be the most common type of autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (ADCA). SCA3 patients suffer from a progressive decline in motor coordination and other disease-associated symptoms. Moreover, recent studies have reported that SCA3 patients also exhibit symptoms of cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome (CCAS). We previously observed signs of CCAS in mouse model of SCA3. Particularly, SCA3-84Q mice suffer from anxiety, recognition memory decline, and also exhibit signs of low mood and aversion to activity. Here we studied the effect of long-term injections of SK channels activator chlorzoxazone (CHZ) together and separately with the folic acid (FA) on the cerebellar Purkinje cell (PC) firing and histology, and also on the motor and cognitive functions as well as mood alterations in SCA3-84Q hemizygous transgenic mice. We realized that both CHZ and CHZ-FA combination had similar positive effect on pure cerebellum impairments including PC firing precision, PC histology, and motor performance in SCA3-84Q mice. However, only the CHZ-FA combination, but not CHZ, had significantly ameliorated the signs of anxiety and depression, and also noticeably improved recognition memory in SCA3-84Q mice. Our results suggest that the combination therapy for both ataxia and non-motor symptoms is required for the complex treatment of ADCA.
Microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer (MSI-CRC) can arise through germline mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes in individuals with Lynch syndrome (LS), or sporadically through promoter methylation of the MMR gene MLH1. Despite the different origins of hereditary and sporadic MSI tumours, their genomic features have not been extensively compared. A prominent feature of MMR-deficient genomes is the occurrence of many indels in short repeat sequences, an understudied mutation type due to the technical challenges of variant calling in these regions. In this study, we performed whole genome sequencing and RNA-sequencing on 29 sporadic and 14 hereditary MSI-CRCs. We compared the tumour groups by analysing genome-wide mutation densities, microsatellite repeat indels, recurrent protein-coding variants, signatures of single base, doublet base, and indel mutations, and changes in gene expression. We show that the mutational landscapes of hereditary and sporadic MSI-CRCs, including mutational signatures and mutation densities genome-wide and in microsatellites, are highly similar. Only a low number of differentially expressed genes were found, enriched to interferon-gamma regulated immune response pathways. Analysis of the variance in allelic fractions of somatic variants in each tumour group revealed higher clonal heterogeneity in sporadic MSI-CRCs. Our results suggest that the differing molecular origins of MMR deficiency in hereditary and sporadic MSI-CRCs do not result in substantial differences in the mutational landscapes of these tumours. The divergent patterns of clonal evolution between the tumour groups may have clinical implications, as high clonal heterogeneity has been associated with decreased tumour immunosurveillance and reduced responsiveness to immunotherapy.
Retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), including RIG-I, MDA5 and LGP2, recognize viral RNA to mount an antiviral interferon (IFN) response RLRs share three different protein domains: C-terminal domain, DExD/H box RNA helicase domain, and an N-terminal domain with two tandem repeats (CARDs). LGP2 lacks tandem CARD and is not able to induce an IFN response. However, LGP2 positively enhances MDA5 and negatively regulates RIG-I signaling. In this study, we determined the LGP2 alternative transcripts in humans to further comprehend the mechanism of its regulation, their evolutionary origin, and the isoforms functionallity. The results showed new eight alternative transcripts in the samples tested. The presence of these transcripts demonstrated that the main mechanisms for the regulation of LGP2 expression are both by insertion of introns and by the loss of exons. The phylogenetic analysis of the comparison between sequences from exon 1 to exon 3 of humans and those previously described in non-human primates showed three well-differentiated groups (lineages) originating from gorillas, suggesting that the transspecies evolution has been maintained for 10 million years. The corresponding protein models (isoforms) were also established, obtaining four isoforms: one complete and three others lacking the C-terminal domain or this domain and the partial or total He2 Helicase domain, which would compromise the functionality of LGP2. In conclusion, this is the first study that elucidate the large genomic organization and complex transcriptional regulation of human LGP2, its pattern of sequence generation, and a mode of evolutionary inheritance across species.
We have generated using CRISPR/Cas9 technology a partially humanized mouse model of the neurometabolic disease phenylketonuria (PKU), carrying the highly prevalent PAH variant c.1066-11G>A. This variant creates an alternative 3' splice site, leading to the inclusion of 9 nucleotides coding for 3 extra amino acids between Q355 and Y356 of the protein. Homozygous Pah c.1066-11A mice, with a partially humanized intron 10 sequence with the variant, accurately recapitulate the splicing defect and present almost undetectable hepatic PAH activity. They exhibit fur hypopigmentation, lower brain and body weight and reduced survival. Blood and brain phenylalanine levels are elevated, along with decreased tyrosine, tryptophan and monoamine neurotransmitter levels. They present behavioral deficits, mainly hypoactivity and diminished social interaction, locomotor deficiencies and an abnormal hind-limb clasping reflex. Changes in the morphology of glial cells, increased GFAP and Iba1 staining signals and decreased myelinization are observed. Hepatic tissue exhibits nearly absent PAH protein, reduced levels of chaperones DNAJC12 and HSP70 and increased autophagy markers LAMP1 and LC3BII, suggesting possible coaggregation of mutant PAH with chaperones and subsequent autophagy processing. This PKU mouse model with a prevalent human variant represents a useful tool for pathophysiology research and for novel therapies development.
Gaucher Disease (GD) is an inherited metabolic disorder caused by mutations in the GBA1 gene. It can manifest with severe neurodegeneration and visceral pathology. The most acute neuronopathic form (nGD), for which there are no curative therapeutic options, is characterised by devastating neuropathology and death during infancy. In this study, we investigated the therapeutic benefit of systemically delivered AAV9 vectors expressing the human GBA1 gene at two different doses comparing a neuronal-selective promoter with ubiquitous promoters. Our results highlight the importance of a careful evaluation of the promoter sequence used in gene delivery vectors, suggesting a neuron-targeted therapy leading to high levels of enzymatic activity in the brain but lower GCase expression in the viscera, might be the optimal therapeutic strategy for nGD.
Syntaxin-binding protein 1 (STXBP1) is a presynaptic protein that plays important roles in synaptic vesicle docking and fusion. STXBP1 haploinsufficiency causes STXBP1 encephalopathy (STXBP1-E), which encompasses neurological disturbances including epilepsy, neurodevelopmental disorders, and movement disorders. Most patients with STXBP1-E present with regression and movement disorders in adulthood, highlighting the importance of a deeper understanding of the neurodegenerative aspects of STXBP1-E. An in vitro study proposed an interesting new role of STXBP1 as a molecular chaperone for alpha-Synuclein (alpha Syn), a key molecule in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. However, no studies have shown alpha Syn pathology in model organisms or patients with STXBP1-E. In this study, we used Drosophila models to examine the effects of STXBP1 haploinsufficiency on alpha Syn-induced neurotoxicity in vivo. We demonstrated that haploinsufficiency of Ras opposite (Rop), the Drosophila ortholog of STXBP1, exacerbates compound eye degeneration, locomotor dysfunction, and dopaminergic neurodegeneration in alpha Syn-expressing flies. This phenotypic aggravation was associated with a significant increase in detergent-insoluble alpha Syn levels in the head. Furthermore, we tested whether trehalose, which has neuroprotective effects in various models of neurodegenerative disorders, mitigates alpha Syn-induced neurotoxicity exacerbated by Rop haploinsufficiency. In flies expressing alpha Syn and carrying a heterozygous Rop null variant, trehalose supplementation effectively alleviates neuronal phenotypes, accompanied by a decrease in detergent-insoluble alpha Syn in the head. In conclusion, this study revealed that Rop haploinsufficiency exacerbates alpha Syn-induced neurotoxicity by altering the alpha Syn aggregation propensity. This study not only contributes to understanding the mechanisms of neurodegeneration in STXBP1-E patients, but also provides new insights into the pathogenesis of alpha-synucleinopathies.
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is the most common form of scoliosis, in which spinal curvature develops in adolescence, and 90% of patients are female. Scoliosis is a debilitating disease that often requires bracing or surgery in severe cases. AIS affects 2%-5.2% of the population; however, the biological origin of the disease remains poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to determine the function of a highly conserved genomic region previously linked to AIS using a mouse model generated by CRISPR-CAS9 gene editing to knockout this area of the genome to understand better its contribution to AIS, which we named AIS_CRM Delta. We also investigated the upstream factors that regulate the activity of this enhancer in vivo, whether the spatial expression of the LBX1 protein would change with the loss of AIS-CRM function, and whether any phenotype would arise after deletion of this region. We found a significant increase in mRNA expression in the developing neural tube at E10.5, and E12.5, for not only Lbx1 but also other neighboring genes. Adult knockout mice showed vertebral rotation and proprioceptive deficits, also observed in human AIS patients. In conclusion, our study sheds light on the elusive biological origins of AIS, by targeting and investigating a highly conserved genomic region linked to AIS in humans. These findings provide valuable insights into the function of the investigated region and contribute to our understanding of the underlying causes of this debilitating disease.
Mutations in DNAJB6 are a well-established cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy type D1 (LGMD D1). Patients with LGMD D1 develop progressive muscle weakness with histology showing fibre damage, autophagic vacuoles, and aggregates. Whilst there are many reports of LGMD D1 patients, the role of DNAJB6 in the muscle is still unclear. In this study, we developed a loss of function zebrafish model in order to investigate the role of Dnajb6. Using a double dnajb6a and dnajb6b mutant model, we show that loss of Dnajb6 leads to a late onset muscle weakness. Interestingly, we find that adult fish lacking Dnajb6 do not have autophagy or myofibril defects, however, they do show mitochondrial changes and damage. This study demonstrates that loss of Dnajb6 causes mitochondrial defects and suggests that this contributes to muscle weakness in LGMD D1. These findings expand our knowledge of the role of Dnajb6 in the muscle and provides a model to screen novel therapies for LGMD D1.
In human cells, the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes engage in a complex interplay to produce dual-encoded oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complexes. The coordination of these dynamic gene expression processes is essential for producing matched amounts of OXPHOS protein subunits. This review focuses on our current understanding of the mitochondrial central dogma rates, highlighting the striking differences in gene expression rates between mitochondrial and nuclear genes. We synthesize a coherent model of mitochondrial gene expression kinetics, highlighting the emerging principles and emphasizing where more precise measurements would be beneficial. Such an understanding is pivotal for grasping the unique aspects of mitochondrial function and its role in cellular energetics, and it has profound implications for aging, metabolic disorders, and neurodegenerative diseases.
Purpose: Exfoliation syndrome (XFS) is a systemic disease of elastin-rich tissues involving a deposition of fibrillar exfoliative material (XFM) in the anterior chamber of the eye, which can promote glaucoma. The purpose of this study was to create mice with CRISPR/Cas9-induced variations in candidate genes identified from human genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and screen them for indices of XFS. Methods: Variants predicted to be deleterious were sought in the Agpat1, Cacna1a, Loxl1, Pomp, Rbms3, Sema6a, and Tlcd5 genes of C57BL/6J mice using CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing. Strains were phenotyped by slit-lamp, SD-OCT imaging, and fundus exams at 1-5 mos of age. Smaller cohorts of 12-mos-old mice were also studied. Results: Deleterious variants were identified in six targets; Pomp was recalcitrant to targeting. Multiple alleles of some targets were isolated, yielding 12 strains. Across all genotypes and ages, 277 mice were assessed by 902 slit-lamp exams, 928 SD-OCT exams, and 358 fundus exams. Homozygosity for Agpat1 or Cacna1a mutations led to early lethality; homozygosity for Loxl1 mutations led to pelvic organ prolapse, preventing aging. Loxl1 homozygotes exhibited a conjunctival phenotype of potential relevance to XFS. Multiple other genotype-specific phenotypes were variously identified. XFM was not observed in any mice. Conclusions: This study did not detect XFM in any of the strains. This may have been due to species-specific differences, background dependence, or insufficient aging. Alternatively, it is possible that the current candidates, selected based on proximity to GWAS signals, are not effectors acting via monogenic loss-of-function mechanisms.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease caused by destruction of the pancreatic beta-cells. Genome-wide association (GWAS) and fine mapping studies have been conducted mainly in European ancestry (EUR) populations. We performed a multi-ancestry GWAS to identify SNPs and HLA alleles associated with T1D risk and age at onset. EUR families (N = 3223), and unrelated individuals of African (AFR, N = 891) and admixed (Hispanic/Latino) ancestry (AMR, N = 308) were genotyped using the Illumina HumanCoreExome BeadArray, with imputation to the TOPMed reference panel. The Multi-Ethnic HLA reference panel was utilized to impute HLA alleles and amino acid residues. Logistic mixed models (T1D risk) and frailty models (age at onset) were used for analysis. In GWAS meta-analysis, seven loci were associated with T1D risk at genome-wide significance: PTPN22, HLA-DQA1, IL2RA, RNLS, INS, IKZF4-RPS26-ERBB3, and SH2B3, with four associated with T1D age at onset (PTPN22, HLA-DQB1, INS, and ERBB3). AFR and AMR meta-analysis revealed NRP1 as associated with T1D risk and age at onset, although NRP1 variants were not associated in EUR ancestry. In contrast, the PTPN22 variant was significantly associated with risk only in EUR ancestry. HLA alleles and haplotypes most significantly associated with T1D risk in AFR and AMR ancestry differed from that seen in EUR ancestry; in addition, the HLA-DRB1*08:02-DQA1*04:01-DQB1*04:02 haplotype was 'protective' in AMR while HLA-DRB1*08:01-DQA1*04:01-DQB1*04:02 haplotype was 'risk' in EUR ancestry, differing only at HLA-DRB1*08. These results suggest that much larger sample sizes in non-EUR populations are required to capture novel loci associated with T1D risk.
Genetic variants in the genes GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRIN2B, and GRIN2D, which encode subunits of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR), have been associated with severe and heterogeneous neurologic and neurodevelopmental disorders, including early onset epilepsy, developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorders. Missense variants in these genes can result in gain or loss of the NMDAR function, requiring opposite therapeutic treatments. Computational methods that predict pathogenicity and molecular functional effects of missense variants are therefore crucial for therapeutic applications. We assembled 223 missense variants from patients, 631 control variants from the general population, and 160 missense variants characterized by electrophysiological readouts that show whether they can enhance or reduce the function of the receptor. This includes new functional data from 33 variants reported here, for the first time. By mapping these variants onto the NMDAR protein structures, we found that pathogenic/benign variants and variants that increase/decrease the channel function were distributed unevenly on the protein structure, with spatial proximity to ligands bound to the agonist and antagonist binding sites being a key predictive feature for both variant pathogenicity and molecular functional consequences. Leveraging distances from ligands, we developed two machine-learning based predictors for NMDA variants: a pathogenicity predictor which outperforms currently available predictors and the first molecular function (increase/decrease) predictor. Our findings can have direct application to patient care by improving diagnostic yield for genetic neurodevelopmental disorders and by guiding personalized treatment informed by the knowledge of the molecular disease mechanism.
The manipulation of animal mitochondrial genomes has long been a challenge due to the lack of an effective transformation method. With the discovery of specific gene editing enzymes, designed to target pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations (often heteroplasmic), the selective removal or modification of mutant variants has become a reality. Because mitochondria cannot efficiently import RNAs, CRISPR has not been the first choice for editing mitochondrial genes. However, the last few years witnessed an explosion in novel and optimized non-CRISPR approaches to promote double-strand breaks or base-edit of mtDNA in vivo. Engineered forms of specific nucleases and cytidine/adenine deaminases form the basis for these techniques. I will review the newest developments that constitute the current toolbox for animal mtDNA gene editing in vivo, bringing these approaches not only to the exploration of mitochondrial function, but also closer to clinical use.
One of the characteristic regions of brainstem degeneration across multiple spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) is the inferior olive (IO), a medullary nucleus that plays a key role in motor learning. The vulnerability of IO neurons remains a poorly-understood area of SCA pathology. In this work, we address this by evaluating IO disease in SCA1, a prototypic inherited olivopontocerebellar atrophy, using the genetically-precise SCA1 knock-in (SCA1-KI) mouse. We find that these mice exhibit olivary hypertrophy, a phenotype reminiscent of a degenerative disorder known as hypertrophic olivary degeneration (HOD). Similar to early stages of HOD, SCA1-KI IO neurons display early dendritic lengthening and later somatic expansion without frank cell loss. Though HOD is known to be caused by brainstem lesions that disrupt IO inhibitory innervation, we observe no loss of inhibitory terminals in the SCA1-KI IO. Additionally, we find that a separate mouse model of SCA1 in which mutant ATXN1 is expressed solely in cerebellar Purkinje cells shows no evidence of olivary hypertrophy. Patch-clamp recordings from brainstem slices indicate that SCA1-KI IO neurons are hyperexcitable, generating spike trains in response to membrane depolarization. Transcriptome analysis further reveals reduced medullary expression of ion channels responsible for IO neuron spike afterhyperpolarization (AHP)-a result that appears to have a functional consequence, as SCA1-KI IO neuron spikes exhibit a diminished AHP. These findings suggest that expression of mutant ATXN1 in IO neurons results in an HOD-like olivary hypertrophy, in association with increased intrinsic membrane excitability and ion channel transcriptional dysregulation.
X-chromosome inactivation is triggered by the long non-coding RNA XIST, whose structure is characterized by tandem repeats that modularly recruit different proteins and chromatin remodelers. Previously, we reported that the addition of the mouse PID region to a transgene with human repeat regions A, F and E (miniXIST; 5.1 kb) enabled binding of HNRNPK and also enabled the induction of silencing and recruitment of H3K27me3, UbH2A and H4K20me1, but only partially. As the 680 bp PID region enabled so many features of inactivation, we hypothesized that augmenting the PID with more mouse or human sequences rich in CCC motifs would allow us to design a short transgene which was as effective as Full XIST. Three new transgenes using the A, F and E human domains as a backbone were tested for ability to induce silencing and heterochromatic mark recruitment. The all human-derived BhB-BhB transgene (4.9 kb) was as good as our previous miniXIST, suggesting that these domains are the human equivalent of the mouse PID region. A PID-PID transgene (5.8 kb) was not statistically different from Full XIST and could be potentially used for chromosome therapy. Adding BhB to PID (BhB-PID, 5.4 kb) had an intermediate efficacy compared to the other two transgenes, suggesting that the most important component for silencing and heterochromatic mark recruitment is the number of CCC motifs, not the species of origin. Finally, we created a heterozygous HNRNPK deletion and observed a disproportionate impact on HNRNPK and UbH2A recruitment to XIST, reflecting complex roles for the PID and HNRNPK in X-chromosome inactivation.
Neuromuscular disorders caused by dysfunction of the mitochondrial respiratory chain are common, severe and untreatable. We recovered a number of mitochondrial genes, including electron transport chain components, in a large forward genetic screen for mutations causing age-related neurodegeneration in the context of proteostasis dysfunction. We created a model of complex I deficiency in the Drosophila retina to probe the role of protein degradation abnormalities in mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. Using our genetic model, we found that complex I deficiency regulates both the ubiquitin/proteasome and autophagy/lysosome arms of the proteostasis machinery. We further performed an in vivo kinome screen to uncover new and potentially druggable mechanisms contributing to complex I related neurodegeneration and proteostasis failure. Reduction of RIOK kinases and the innate immune signaling kinase pelle prevented neurodegeneration in complex I deficiency animals. Genetically targeting oxidative stress, but not RIOK1 or pelle knockdown, normalized proteostasis markers. Our findings outline distinct pathways controlling neurodegeneration and protein degradation in complex I deficiency and introduce an experimentally facile model in which to study these debilitating and currently treatment-refractory disorders.
Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant multisystemic disorder for which cardiac features, including conduction delays and arrhythmias, are the second leading cause of disease mortality. DM1 is caused by expanded CTG repeats in the 3 ' untranslated region of the DMPK gene. Transcription of the expanded DMPK allele produces mRNAs containing long tracts of CUG repeats, which sequester the Muscleblind-Like family of RNA binding proteins, leading to their loss-of-function and the dysregulation of alternative splicing. A well-characterized mis-regulated splicing event in the DM1 heart is the increased inclusion of SCN5A exon 6A rather than the mutually exclusive exon 6B that normally predominates in adult heart. As previous work showed that forced inclusion of Scn5a exon 6A in mice recapitulates cardiac DM1 phenotypes, we tested whether rescue of Scn5a mis-splicing would improve the cardiac phenotypes in a DM1 heart mouse model. We generated mice lacking Scn5a exon 6A to force the expression of the adult SCN5A isoform including exon 6B and crossed these mice to our previously established CUG960 DM1 heart mouse model. We showed that correction Scn5a mis-splicing does not improve the DM1 heart conduction delays and structural changes induced by CUG repeat RNA expression. Interestingly, we found that in addition to Scn5a mis-splicing, Scn5a expression is reduced in heart tissues of CUG960 mice and DM1-affected individuals. These data indicate that Scn5a mis-splicing is not the sole driver of DM1 heart deficits and suggest a potential role for reduced Scn5a expression in DM1 cardiac disease.
Generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA) and kaposiform lymphangiomatosis (KLA) are rare congenital disorders that arise through anomalous embryogenesis of the lymphatic system. A somatic activating NRAS p.Q61R variant has been recently detected in GLA and KLA tissues, suggesting that the NRAS p.Q61R variant plays an important role in the development of these diseases. To address this role, we studied the effect of the NRAS p.Q61R variant in lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) on the structure of the lymphatics during embryonic and postnatal lymphangiogenesis applying inducible, LEC-specific NRAS p.Q61R variant in mice. Lox-stop-Lox NrasQ61R mice were crossed with Prox1-CreERT2 mice expressing tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase specifically in LECs. Whole-mount immunostaining of embryonic back skin using an antibody against the LEC surface marker VEGFR3 showed considerably greater lymphatic vessel width in LEC-specific NRAS p.Q61R mutant embryos than in littermate controls. These mutant embryos also showed a significant reduction in the number of lymphatic vessel branches. Furthermore, immunofluorescence staining of whole-mount embryonic back skin using an antibody against the LEC-specific nuclear marker Prox1 showed a large increase in the number of LECs in LEC-specific NRAS p.Q61R mutants. In contrast, postnatal induction of the NRAS p.Q61R variant in LECs did not cause abnormal lymphatic vessel morphogenesis. These results suggest that the NRAS p.Q61R variant in LECs plays a role in development of lymphatic anomalies. While this model does not directly reflect the human pathology of GLA and KLA, there are overlapping features, suggesting that further study of this model may help in studying GLA and KLA mechanisms.
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is a progressive myopathy caused by the aberrant increased expression of the DUX4 retrogene in skeletal muscle cells. The DUX4 gene encodes a transcription factor that functions in zygotic genome activation and then is silenced in most adult somatic tissues. DUX4 expression in FSHD disrupts normal muscle cell function; however, the downstream pathogenic mechanisms are still unclear. Histologically, FSHD affected muscles show a characteristic dystrophic phenotype that is often accompanied by a pronounced immune cell infiltration, but the role of the immune system in FSHD is not understood. Previously, we used ACTA1;FLExDUX4 FSHD-like mouse models varying in severity as discovery tools to identify increased Interleukin 6 and microRNA-206 levels as serum biomarkers for FSHD disease severity. In this study, we use the ACTA1;FLExDUX4 chronic FSHD-like mouse model to provide insight into the immune response to DUX4 expression in skeletal muscles. We demonstrate that these FSHD-like muscles are enriched with the chemoattractant eotaxin and the cytotoxic eosinophil peroxidase, and exhibit muscle eosinophilia. We further identified muscle fibers with positive staining for eosinophil peroxidase in human FSHD muscle. Our data supports that skeletal muscle eosinophilia is a hallmark of FSHD pathology.
The clinical severity of sickle cell disease (SCD) is strongly influenced by the level of fetal haemoglobin (HbF) persistent in each patient. Three major HbF loci (BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and Xmn1-HBG2) have been reported, but a considerable hidden heritability remains. We conducted a genome-wide association study for HbF levels in 1006 Nigerian patients with SCD (HbSS/HbS beta 0), followed by a replication and meta-analysis exercise in four independent SCD cohorts (3,582 patients). To dissect association signals at the major loci, we performed stepwise conditional and haplotype association analyses and included public functional annotation datasets. Association signals were detected for BCL11A (lead SNP rs6706648, beta = -0.39, P = 4.96 x 10(-34)) and HBS1L-MYB (lead SNP rs61028892, beta = 0.73, P = 1.18 x 10(-9)), whereas the variant allele for Xmn1-HBG2 was found to be very rare. In addition, we detected three putative new trait-associated regions. Genetically, dissecting the two major loci BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB, we defined trait-increasing haplotypes (P < 0.0001) containing so far unidentified causal variants. At BCL11A, in addition to a haplotype harbouring the putative functional variant rs1427407-'T', we identified a second haplotype, tagged by the rs7565301-'A' allele, where a yet-to-be-discovered causal DNA variant may reside. Similarly, at HBS1L-MYB, one HbF-increasing haplotype contains the likely functional small indel rs66650371, and a second tagged by rs61028892-'C' is likely to harbour a presently unknown functional allele. Together, variants at BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB SNPs explained 24.1% of the trait variance. Our findings provide a path for further investigation of the causes of variable fetal haemoglobin persistence in sickle cell disease. [Graphical abstract]
MUNC18-1 is an essential protein of the regulated secretion machinery. De novo, heterozygous mutations in STXBP1, the human gene encoding this protein, lead to a severe neurodevelopmental disorder. Here, we describe the electrophysiological characteristics of a unique case of STXBP1-related disorder caused by a homozygous mutation (L446F). We engineered this mutation in induced pluripotent stem cells from a healthy donor (STXBP1LF/LF) to establish isogenic cell models. We performed morphological and electrophysiological analyses on single neurons grown on glial micro-islands. Human STXBP1LF/LF neurons displayed normal morphology and normal basal synaptic transmission but increased paired-pulse ratios and charge released, and reduced synaptic depression compared to control neurons. Immunostainings revealed normal expression levels but impaired recognition by a mutation-specific MUNC18-1 antibody. The electrophysiological gain-of-function phenotype is in line with earlier overexpression studies in Stxbp1 null mouse neurons, with some potentially human-specific features. Therefore, the present study highlights important differences between mouse and human neurons critical for the translatability of pre-clinical studies.
LRRK2 mutations are among the most common genetic causes for Parkinson's disease (PD), and toxicity is associated with increased kinase activity. 14-3-3 proteins are key interactors that regulate LRRK2 kinase activity. Phosphorylation of the 14-3-3 theta isoform at S232 is dramatically increased in human PD brains. Here we investigate the impact of 14-3-3 theta phosphorylation on its ability to regulate LRRK2 kinase activity. Both wildtype and the non-phosphorylatable S232A 14-3-3 theta mutant reduced the kinase activity of wildtype and G2019S LRRK2, whereas the phosphomimetic S232D 14-3-3 theta mutant had minimal effects on LRRK2 kinase activity, as determined by measuring autophosphorylation at S1292 and T1503 and Rab10 phosphorylation. However, wildtype and both 14-3-3 theta mutants similarly reduced the kinase activity of the R1441G LRRK2 mutant. 14-3-3 theta phosphorylation did not promote global dissociation with LRRK2, as determined by co-immunoprecipitation and proximal ligation assays. 14-3-3s interact with LRRK2 at several phosphorylated serine/threonine sites, including T2524 in the C-terminal helix, which can fold back to regulate the kinase domain. Interaction between 14-3-3 theta and phosphorylated T2524 LRRK2 was important for 14-3-3 theta's ability to regulate kinase activity, as wildtype and S232A 14-3-3 theta failed to reduce the kinase activity of G2019S/T2524A LRRK2. Finally, we found that the S232D mutation failed to protect against G2019S LRRK2-induced neurite shortening in primary cultures, while the S232A mutation was protective. We conclude that 14-3-3 theta phosphorylation destabilizes the interaction of 14-3-3 theta with LRRK2 at T2524, which consequently promotes LRRK2 kinase activity and toxicity.
CD2-Associated protein (CD2AP) is a candidate susceptibility gene for Alzheimer's disease, but its role in the mammalian central nervous system remains largely unknown. We show that CD2AP protein is broadly expressed in the adult mouse brain, including within cortical and hippocampal neurons, where it is detected at pre-synaptic terminals. Deletion of Cd2ap altered dendritic branching and spine density, and impaired ubiquitin-proteasome system activity. Moreover, in mice harboring either one or two copies of a germline Cd2ap null allele, we noted increased paired-pulse facilitation at hippocampal Schaffer-collateral synapses, consistent with a haploinsufficient requirement for pre-synaptic release. Whereas conditional Cd2ap knockout in the brain revealed no gross behavioral deficits in either 3.5- or 12-month-old mice, Cd2ap heterozygous mice demonstrated subtle impairments in discrimination learning using a touchscreen task. Based on unbiased proteomics, partial or complete loss of Cd2ap triggered perturbation of proteins with roles in protein folding, lipid metabolism, proteostasis, and synaptic function. Overall, our results reveal conserved, dose-sensitive requirements for CD2AP in the maintenance of neuronal structure and function, including synaptic homeostasis and plasticity, and inform our understanding of possible cell-type specific mechanisms in Alzheimer's Disease.
Background: Genetic abnormalities like Y chromosome microdeletions are implicated in male infertility. This study investigated the association of azoospermia factor (AZF) region microdeletions with unsuccessful assisted reproductive techniques (ART), including in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Methods: This cross-sectional analysis study examined 80 Iranian oligospermic men (mean age 34 years) with prior failed ICSI and IVF cycles (IR.IAU.TNB.REC.1401.041). Semen analysis evaluated quantity/quality parameters based on World Health Organization guidelines. Participants were stratified by sperm DNA fragmentation (SDF) levels into: control (SDF < 15%, n = 20), mild elevation (15% <= SDF <= 30%, n = 60), and high (SDF > 30%, n = 20). Multiplex PCR mapped AZF microdeletions in the high SDF group. The AZF-associated genes were selected by RNA Seq analysis, and the candidate genes were checked for expression level by real-time PCR. Results: High SDF individuals exhibited poorer semen metrics, including 69% lower sperm concentration (P = 0.04) than those without SDF. Of this subset, 45% (9/20 men) harboured predominately AZF microdeletions. Men with AZF microdeletions showed higher SDF (32% vs 21%, P = 0.02) and altered AZF-associated genes expression. As USP9Y 3-fold, UTY 1.3-fold, and BPY2 1-fold revealed up-regulation, while IQCF1 8-fold, CDY 6.5-fold, DAZ 6-fold, and DDX3Y 1-fold underwent down-regulation. The PAWP gene was also down-regulated (5.7-fold, P = 0.029) in the IVF/ICSI failure group. Conclusion: AZF microdeletions significantly impact male infertility and ART outcomes. High SDF individuals exhibited poorer semen metrics, with 45% AZF microdeletions. These microdeletions altered AZF-associated genes expression, affecting fertility mediator PAWP independently. Dual AZF and SDF screening enables personalized management in severe male infertility, potentially explaining IVF/ICSI failures.
Chronic pancreatitis (CP) is an etiologically and genetically heterogeneous inflammatory syndrome characterised by progressive damage to the exocrine and endocrine components of the pancreas [ ]. The multigenic paradigm of CP has sparked research in recent years [ ]. We aimed to expand the current knowledge of genetic susceptibility of pancreatitis in patients of Indian origin. By employing whole-exome sequencing in an Indian hospital cohort, we dissect the genetic landscape associated with CP or recurrent acute pancreatitis (RAP). Notably, all patients had at least one genetic variant identified in a pancreatitis-risk gene, and most had a co-occurrence of a second variant in an additional risk gene. Based on the presence of both acinar and ductal gene variants in individual patients, we propose a two-hit hypothesis where variants in proteins expressed in both acinar and ductal cells are critical for RAP/CP development.
Background Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress (ER stress) was an important event in the development of breast cancer. We aimed to predict prognosis based on ER stress related key genes.Methods Data of the RNA-seq and clinical information of breast cancer cases were downloaded from the TCGA database. A total of 4 genes related with ER stress was identified by the univariate Cox regression and Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO)-penalized Cox proportional hazards regression analysis. The predictive ability of the ER stress model was evaluated by utilizing Kaplan-Meier curves and time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. Moreover, we verified 4 genes expression and its relationship with clinical breast cancer cases in real-world.Results 4 genes including RNF186, BCAP31, SERPINA1, TAPBP were identified as a prognostic risk score model. Based on that, we found patients of breast cancer had a better survival with low-risk score. And also, ER stress model showed a good diagnostic efficacy with AUC curve. The risk score was significantly associated with patients' age, T stage and clinical stage. A nomogram was constructed to estimate individual survival. Further GO and KEGG analysis showed our model was related with immune infiltration. Patients of breast cancer with high-risk scores were usually accompanied with poor immune infiltration. It was predicted that high risk group was more sensitive to Vinorelbine, Docetaxel and Cisplatin. At last, we verified the expression of four signature genes using qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.Conclusion Our ER stress model performed a valuable prediction on breast cancer patients.
Most genetic variants associated with adult height have been identified through large genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in European-ancestry cohorts. However, it is unclear how these variants influence linear growth during adolescence. This study uses anthropometric and genotypic data from a longitudinal study conducted in an American Indian community in Arizona between 1965-2007. Growth parameters (i.e. height, velocity, and timing of growth spurt) were derived from the Preece-Baines growth model, a parametric growth curve fitted to longitudinal height data, in 787 participants with height measurements spanning the whole period of growth. Heritability estimates suggested that genetic factors could explain 25% to 71% of the variance of pubertal growth traits. We performed a GWAS of growth parameters, testing their associations with 5 077 595 imputed or directly genotyped variants. Six variants associated with height at peak velocity (P < 5 x 10(-8), adjusted for sex, birth year and principal components). Implicated genes include NUDT3, previously associated with adult height, and PACSIN1. Two novel variants associated with duration of growth spurt (P < 5 x 10(-8)) in LOC105375344, an uncharacterized gene with unknown function. We finally examined the association of growth parameters with a polygenic score for height derived from 9557 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified in the GIANT meta-analysis for which genotypic data were available for the American Indian study population. Height polygenic score was correlated with the magnitude and velocity of height growth that occurred before and at the peak of the adolescent growth spurt, indicating overlapping genetic architecture, with no influence on the timing of adolescent growth.
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is an inherited neurodevelopmental disorder and the leading genetic cause of autism spectrum disorders. FXS is caused by loss of function mutations in Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), an RNA binding protein that is known to regulate translation of its target mRNAs, predominantly in the brain and gonads. The molecular mechanisms connecting FMRP function to neurodevelopmental phenotypes are well understood. However, neither the full extent of reproductive phenotypes, nor the underlying molecular mechanisms have been as yet determined. Here, we developed new fmr1 knockout zebrafish lines and show that they mimic key aspects of FXS neuronal phenotypes across both larval and adult stages. Results from the fmr1 knockout females also showed that altered gene expression in the brain, via the neuroendocrine pathway contribute to distinct abnormal phenotypes during ovarian development and oocyte maturation. We identified at least three mechanisms underpinning these defects, including altered neuroendocrine signaling in sexually mature females resulting in accelerated ovarian development, altered expression of germ cell and meiosis promoting genes at various stages during oocyte maturation, and finally a strong mitochondrial impairment in late stage oocytes from knockout females. Our findings have implications beyond FXS in the study of reproductive function and female infertility. Dissection of the translation control pathways during ovarian development using models like the knockout lines reported here may reveal novel approaches and targets for fertility treatments.
Short tandem repeat expansions in the human genome are overrepresented in a variety of neurological disorders. It was recently shown that huntingtin (HTT) repeat expansions with full penetrance, i.e. 40 or more CAG repeats, which normally cause Huntington's disease (HD), are overrepresented in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Whether patients carrying HTT repeat expansions with reduced penetrance, (36-39 CAG repeats), or alleles with intermediate penetrance, (27-35 CAG repeats), have an increased risk of ALS has not yet been investigated. Here, we examined the role of HTT repeat expansions in a motor neuron disease (MND) cohort, searched for expanded HTT alleles, and investigated correlations with phenotype and neuropathology. MND patients harboring C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions (HREs) were included, to investigate whether HTT repeat expansions were more common in this group. We found a high prevalence of intermediate (range 5.63%-6.61%) and reduced penetrance (range 0.57%-0.66%) HTT gene expansions in this cohort compared to other populations of European ancestry, but no differences between the MND cohort and the control cohort were observed, regardless of C9ORF72HRE status. Upon autopsy of three patients with intermediate or reduced penetrance HTT alleles, huntingtin inclusions were observed in the caudate nucleus and frontal lobe, but no significant somatic mosaicism was detected in different parts of the nervous system. Thus, we demonstrate, for the first time, huntingtin inclusions in individuals with MND and intermediate and reduced penetrance HTT repeat expansions but more clinicopathological investigations are needed to further understand the impact of HTT gene expansion-related pleiotropy.
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS) is a genetic disorder caused by point mutations or deletions in the gene-encoding transcription factor TRPS1. TRPS patients display a range of skeletal dysplasias, including reduced jaw size, short stature, and a cone-shaped digit epiphysis. Certain TRPS patients experience early onset coxarthrosis that leads to a devastating drop in their daily activities. The etiologies of congenital skeletal abnormalities of TRPS were revealed through the analysis of Trps1 mutant mouse strains. However, early postnatal lethality in Trps1 knockout mice has hampered the study of postnatal TRPS pathology. Here, through epigenomic analysis we identified two previously uncharacterized candidate gene regulatory regions in the first intron of Trps1. We deleted these regions, either individually or simultaneously, and examined their effects on skeletal morphogenesis. Animals that were deleted individually for either region displayed only modest phenotypes. In contrast, the Trps1 Delta int/Delta int mouse strain with simultaneous deletion of both genomic regions exhibit postnatal growth retardation. This strain displayed delayed secondary ossification center formation in the long bones and misshaped hip joint development that resulted in acetabular dysplasia. Reducing one allele of the Trps1 gene in Trps1 Delta int mice resulted in medial patellar dislocation that has been observed in some patients with TRPS. Our novel Trps1 hypomorphic strain recapitulates many postnatal pathologies observed in human TRPS patients, thus positioning this strain as a useful animal model to study postnatal TRPS pathogenesis. Our observations also suggest that Trps1 gene expression is regulated through several regulatory elements, thus guaranteeing robust expression maintenance in skeletal cells.
While many disease-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), a large proportion of genome-wide association study (GWAS) variants are of unknown function. Alternative polyadenylation (APA) plays an important role in posttranscriptional regulation by allowing genes to shorten or extend 3 ' untranslated regions (UTRs). We hypothesized that genetic variants that affect APA in lung tissue may lend insight into the function of respiratory associated GWAS loci. We generated alternative polyadenylation (apa) QTLs using RNA sequencing and whole genome sequencing on 1241 subjects from the Lung Tissue Research Consortium (LTRC) as part of the NHLBI TOPMed project. We identified 56 179 APA sites corresponding to 13 582 unique genes after filtering out APA sites with low usage. We found that a total of 8831 APA sites were associated with at least one SNP with q-value < 0.05. The genomic distribution of lead APA SNPs indicated that the majority are intronic variants (33%), followed by downstream gene variants (26%), 3 ' UTR variants (17%), and upstream gene variants (within 1 kb region upstream of transcriptional start site, 10%). APA sites in 193 genes colocalized with GWAS data for at least one phenotype. Genes containing the top APA sites associated with GWAS variants include membrane associated ring-CH-type finger 2 (MARCHF2), nectin cell adhesion molecule 2 (NECTIN2), and butyrophilin subfamily 3 member A2 (BTN3A2). Overall, these findings suggest that APA may be an important mechanism for genetic variants in lung function and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Regions of Homozygosity (ROH) typically reflect normal demographic history of a human population, but may also relate to cryptic consanguinity, and, additionally, have been associated with specific medical conditions. The objective of this study was to investigate the location, size, and prevalence of common ROH segments in a Middle Eastern cohort. This retrospective study included 13 483 samples collected from all Chromosomal Microarray analyses (CMA) performed using Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) arrays at the genetic clinical laboratory of Rabin Medical Center between 2017-2023 (primary data set). An additional replication cohort including 100 842 samples from another SNP array platform, obtained from Maccabi Health Organization, was analyzed. Common ROH locations were defined as those ROH locations involving 1% or more of the samples. A total of 66 710 ROH segments, involving 13 035 samples (96.7%) were identified in the primary data set. Of the 4069 cytogenetic ROH locations, 68 were identified as common. The prevalence of non-common ROH was relatively high in affected individuals, and for acrocentric chromosomes, chromosomes associated with common trisomies, and non-imprinted chromosomes. In addition, differences in common ROH locations were observed between the primary and the replication cohorts. Our findings highlight the need for population-specific guidelines in determining ROH reporting cutoffs, considering factors such as population-specific prevalence and testing platform differences. Future research with larger, varied cohorts is essential to advance understanding of ROH's associations with medical conditions and to improve clinical practices accordingly.
The heterotrimeric protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) complex catalyzes about half of Ser/Thr dephosphorylations in eukaryotic cells. A CAG repeat expansion in the neuron-specific protein PP2A regulatory subunit PPP2R2B gene causes spinocerebellar ataxia type 12 (SCA12). We established five monoallelic missense variants in PPP2R2B (four confirmed as de novo) as a cause of intellectual disability with developmental delay (R149P, T246K, N310K, E37K, I427T). In addition to moderate to severe intellectual disability and developmental delay, affected individuals presented with seizures, microcephaly, aggression, hypotonia, as well as broad-based or stiff gait. We used biochemical and cellular assays, including a novel luciferase complementation assay to interrogate PP2A holoenzyme assembly and activity, as well as deregulated mitochondrial dynamics as possible pathogenic mechanisms. Cell-based assays documented impaired ability of PPP2R2B missense variants to incorporate into the PP2A holoenzyme, localize to mitochondria, induce fission of neuronal mitochondria, and dephosphorylate the mitochondrial fission enzyme dynamin-related protein 1. AlphaMissense-based pathogenicity prediction suggested that an additional seven unreported missense variants may be pathogenic. In conclusion, our studies identify loss-of-function at the PPP2R2B locus as the basis for syndromic intellectual disability with developmental delay. They also extend PPP2R2B-related pathologies from neurodegenerative (SCA12) to neurodevelopmental disorders and suggests that altered mitochondrial dynamics may contribute to mechanisms.
The hexanucleotide G4C2 repeat expansion (HRE) in C9ORF72 gene is the major cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), leading to both loss- and gain-of-function pathomechanisms. The wide clinical heterogeneity among C9ORF72 patients suggests potential modifying genetic and epigenetic factors. Notably, C9ORF72 HRE often co-occurs with other rare variants in ALS/FTD-associated genes, such as NEK1, which encodes for a kinase involved in multiple cell pathways, including DNA damage response and ciliogenesis. In this study, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and differentiated motoneurons (iPSC-MNs) from an ALS patient carrying both C9ORF72 HRE and a NEK1 loss-of-function mutation to investigate the biological effect of NEK1 haploinsufficiency on C9ORF72 pathology in a condition of oligogenicity. Double mutant C9ORF72/NEK1 cells showed increased pathological C9ORF72 RNA foci in iPSCs and higher DNA damage levels in iPSC-MNs compared to single mutant C9ORF72 cells, but no effect on DNA damage response. When we analysed the primary cilium, we observed a defective ciliogenesis in C9ORF72 iPSC-MNs which was not worsened by NEK1 haploinsufficiency in the double mutant iPSC-MNs. Altogether, our study shows that NEK1 haploinsufficiency influences differently DNA damage and cilia length, potentially acting as a modifier at biological level in an in vitro ALS patient-derived disease model of C9ORF72 pathology.
Mitochondria are vital organelles present in almost all eukaryotic cells. Although most of the mitochondrial proteins are nuclear-encoded, mitochondria contain their own genome, whose proper expression is necessary for mitochondrial function. Transcription of the human mitochondrial genome results in the synthesis of long polycistronic transcripts that are subsequently processed by endonucleases to release individual RNA molecules, including precursors of sense protein-encoding mRNA (mt-mRNA) and a vast amount of antisense noncoding RNAs. Because of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) organization, the regulation of individual gene expression at the transcriptional level is limited. Although transcription of most protein-coding mitochondrial genes occurs with the same frequency, steady-state levels of mature transcripts are different. Therefore, post-transcriptional processes are important for regulating mt-mRNA levels. The mitochondrial degradosome is a complex composed of the RNA helicase SUV3 (also known as SUPV3L1) and polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase, PNPT1). It is the best-characterized RNA-degrading machinery in human mitochondria, which is primarily responsible for the decay of mitochondrial antisense RNA. The mechanism of mitochondrial sense RNA decay is less understood. This review aims to provide a general picture of mitochondrial genome expression, with a particular focus on mitochondrial RNA (mtRNA) degradation.
Gain-of-function variants in GFAP leads to protein aggregation and is the cause of the severe neurodegenerative disorder Alexander Disease (AxD), while loss of GFAP function has been considered benign. Here, we investigated a six-generation family, where multiple individuals presented with gliosis of the optic nerve head and visual impairment. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) revealed a frameshift variant in GFAP (c.928dup, p.(Met310Asnfs*113)) segregating with disease. Analysis of human embryonic tissues revealed strong expression of GFAP in retinal neural progenitors. A zebrafish model verified that c.928dup does not result in extensive GFAP protein aggregation and zebrafish gfap loss-of-function mutants showed vision impairment and retinal dysplasia, characterized by a significant loss of M & uuml;ller glia cells and photoreceptor cells. Our findings show how different mutational mechanisms can cause diverging phenotypes and reveal a novel function of GFAP in vertebrate eye development.
Background Primary ciliopathies are a heterogeneous group of rare disorders predominantly caused by autosomal-recessive genetic variants that disrupt non-motile ciliary function. They often manifest as a syndromic phenotype, frequently involving the kidney. Biallelic pathogenic variants in C2CD3 disrupt ciliogenesis and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling, resulting in a severe ciliopathy (Orofaciodigital syndrome XIV, OMIM 615948). We present compound heterozygous missense variants in C2CD3 that partially disrupt ciliary function in a patient with isolated renal disease. Methods Exome sequencing identified biallelic C2CD3 missense variants (p.Pro168Leu; p.Thr2079Met). Patient-derived fibroblasts and urinary renal epithelial cells (URECs), and human RPE-1 C2CD3 knockout (KO) cell-lines were used for in vitro studies. Results Cilia length was significantly shorter in patient-derived fibroblasts compared to an unaffected sibling (2.309 vs. 2.850 mu m, P < 0.0001), while URECs showed significantly shortened cilia (2.068 vs. 2.807 mu m, P < 0.0001) and a 40.8% reduction in ciliation (P < 0.001). The latter was not observed in fibroblasts, suggesting a kidney-specific effect. SHH signaling was dysregulated in patient cells as expression of GLI3 activator protein and GLI1 mRNA was significantly reduced. C2CD3 localization to the basal body was significantly reduced in patient URECs. Finally, rescue experiments in C2CD3 KO RPE-1 cells corroborated these findings by demonstrating a reduced capacity to restore ciliogenesis for each variant. Conclusion Biallelic hypomorphic missense variants in C2CD3 may contribute to an isolated nephronophthisis phenotype with impaired ciliogenesis and SHH signaling. Our findings underscore the importance of functional testing to characterize candidate gene-disease relationships in patients with nephropathy of unknown etiology.
Mutations in AIFM1, encoding for apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), cause AUNX1, an X-linked neurologic disorder with late-onset auditory neuropathy (AN) and peripheral neuropathy. Despite significant research on AIF, there are limited animal models with the disrupted AIFM1 representing the corresponding phenotype of human AUNX1, characterized by late-onset hearing loss and impaired auditory pathways. Here, we generated an Aifm1 p.R450Q knock-in mouse model (KI) based on the human AIFM1 p.R451Q mutation. Hemizygote KI male mice exhibited progressive hearing loss from P30 onward, with greater severity at P60 and stabilization until P210. Additionally, muscle atrophy was observed at P210. These phenotypic changes were accompanied by a gradual reduction in the number of spiral ganglion neuron cells (SGNs) at P30 and ribbons at P60, which coincided with the translocation of AIF into the nucleus starting from P21 and P30, respectively. The SGNs of KI mice at P210 displayed loss of cytomembrane integrity, abnormal nuclear morphology, and dendritic and axonal demyelination. Furthermore, the inner hair cells and myelin sheath displayed abnormal mitochondrial morphology, while fibroblasts from KI mice showed impaired mitochondrial function. In conclusion, we successfully generated a mouse model recapitulating AUNX1. Our findings indicate that disruption of Aifm1 induced the nuclear translocation of AIF, resulting in the impairment in the auditory pathway.
The cGAS-STING pathway detects cytosolic DNA and activates a signaling cascade that results in a type I interferon (IFN) response. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated exonuclease TREX1 suppresses cGAS-STING by eliminating DNA from the cytosol. Mutations that compromise TREX1 function are linked to autoinflammatory disorders, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Aicardi-Gouti & egrave;res syndrome (AGS). Despite key roles in regulating cGAS-STING and suppressing excessive inflammation, the impact of many disease-associated TREX1 mutations-particularly those outside of the core catalytic domains-remains poorly understood. Here, we characterize a recessive AGS-linked TREX1 P61Q mutation occurring within the poorly characterized polyproline helix (PPII) motif. In keeping with its position outside of the catalytic core or ER targeting motifs, neither the P61Q mutation, nor aggregate proline-to-alanine PPII mutation, disrupts TREX1 exonuclease activity, subcellular localization, or cGAS-STING regulation in overexpression systems. Introducing targeted mutations into the endogenous TREX1 locus revealed that PPII mutations destabilize the protein, resulting in impaired exonuclease activity and unrestrained cGAS-STING activation. Overall, these results demonstrate that TREX1 PPII mutations, including P61Q, impair proper immune regulation and lead to autoimmune disease through TREX1 destabilization.
Objective This study aims to identify BMI-associated genes by integrating aggregated summary information from different omics data.Methods We conducted a meta-analysis to leverage information from a genome-wide association study (n = 339 224), a transcriptome-wide association study (n = 5619), and an epigenome-wide association study (n = 3743). We prioritized the significant genes with a machine learning-based method, netWAS, which borrows information from adipose tissue-specific interaction networks. We also used the brain-specific network in netWAS to investigate genes potentially involved in brain-adipose interaction.Results We identified 195 genes that were significantly associated with BMI through meta-analysis. The netWAS analysis narrowed down the list to 21 genes in adipose tissue. Among these 21 genes, six genes, including FUS, STX4, CCNT2, FUBP1, NDUFS3, and RAPSN, were not reported to be BMI-associated in PubMed or GWAS Catalog. We also identified 11 genes that were significantly associated with BMI in both adipose and whole brain tissues.Conclusion This study integrated three types of omics data and identified a group of genes that have not previously been reported to be associated with BMI. This strategy could provide new insights for future studies to identify molecular mechanisms contributing to BMI regulation.
Spinal Muscular Atrophy is caused by partial loss of survival of motoneuron (SMN) protein expression. The numerous interaction partners and mechanisms influenced by SMN loss result in a complex disease. Current treatments restore SMN protein levels to a certain extent, but do not cure all symptoms. The prolonged survival of patients creates an increasing need for a better understanding of SMA. Although many SMN-protein interactions, dysregulated pathways, and organ phenotypes are known, the connections among them remain largely unexplored. Monogenic diseases are ideal examples for the exploration of cause-and-effect relationships to create a network describing the disease-context. Machine learning tools can utilize such knowledge to analyze similarities between disease-relevant molecules and molecules not described in the disease so far. We used an artificial intelligence-based algorithm to predict new genes of interest. The transcriptional regulation of 8 out of 13 molecules selected from the predicted set were successfully validated in an SMA mouse model. This bioinformatic approach, using the given experimental knowledge for relevance predictions, enhances efficient targeted research in SMA and potentially in other disease settings.
Background: Genetic variants associated with molecular traits that are also associated with liability to glioma can provide causal evidence for the identification and prioritisation of drug targets. Methods: We performed comprehensive two-sample Mendelian randomisation (Wald ratio and/or IVW) and colocalisation analyses of molecular traits on glioma. Instrumentable traits (QTLs P < 5 x 10(-8)) were identified amongst 11 985 gene expression measures, 13 285 splicing isoforms and 10 198 protein abundance measures, derived from 15 brain regions. Glioma summary-level data was extracted from a genome-wide association meta-analysis of 12 496 cases and 18 190 controls. Results: We found evidence for causal effect of 22 molecular traits (across 18 genes/proteins) on glioma risk. Thirteen molecular traits have been previously linked with glioma risk and five were novel; HBEGF (5q31.3) expression and all glioma [OR 1.36 (95%CI 1.19-1.55); P = 4.41 x 10(-6)]; a CEP192 (18p11.21) splice isoform and glioblastoma [OR 4.40 (95%CI 2.28-8.48); P = 9.78 x 10(-4)]; a FAIM (3q22.3) splice isoform and all glioma [OR 2.72-3.43; P = 1.03 x 10(-5) to 1.09 x 10(-5)]; a SLC8A1 (2p22.1) splice isoform and all glioma [OR 0.37 (95%CI 0.24-0.56; P = 5.72 x 10(-6)]; D2HGDH (2q37.3) protein and all glioma [OR 0.86 (95%CI 0.80-0.92); P = 5.94 x 10(-6))]. Conclusions: We provide robust causal evidence for prioritising genes and their protein products in glioma research. Our results highlight the importance of alternative splicing as a mechanism in gliomagenesis and as an avenue for exploration of drug targets.
Craniofacial anomalies encompassing the orofacial cleft are associated with > 30% of systemic congenital malformations. Baraitser-Winter Cerebrofrontofacial syndrome (BWCFF) is a rare genetic disorder attributed to variants in the actin beta (ACTB) or actin gamma genes that are correlated with a range of craniofacial abnormalities, including cleft lip and/or palate. The underlying pathological mechanism of BWCFF remains elusive, and it is necessary to investigate the etiology of orofacial clefts in patients with BWCFF. In this study, we identified a missense variant (c.1043C > T: p.S348L) in the ACTB gene of a patient with BWCFF and concomitant cleft lip and palate. Furthermore, we performed functional assessments of this variant using various disease models such as the MDCK cell line and Xenopus laevis. These models revealed a compromised capacity of mutated ACTB to localize to the epithelial junction, consequently affecting the behavior of epithelial cells. Additionally, we discovered that the mutated ACTB exhibited an impaired ability to bind PROFILIN1, a critical factor in actin polymerization. This defective ability may contribute to the molecular etiology of aberrant epithelial cell adhesion and migration, resulting in orofacial cleft formation in BWCFF.
We have recently discovered that the so-called subcortical maternal complex (SCMC) proteins composing of cytoplasmic lattices are destabilized in Uhrf1 knockout murine fully grown oocytes (FGOs). Here we report that human UHRF1 interacts with human NLRP5 and OOEP, which are core components of the SCMC. Moreover, NLRP5 and OOEP interact with DPPA3, which is an essential factor for exporting UHRF1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in oocytes. We identify that NLRP5, not OOEP, stabilizes UHRF1 protein in the cytoplasm utilizing specifically engineered cell lines mimicking UHRF1 status in oocytes and preimplantation embryos. Further, UHRF1 is destabilized both in the cytoplasm and nucleus of Nlrp5 knockout murine FGOs. Since pathogenic variants of the SCMC components frequently cause multilocus imprinting disturbance and UHRF1 is essential for maintaining CpG methylation of imprinting control regions during preimplantation development, our results suggest possible pathogenesis behind the disease, which has been a long-standing mystery.
Mitochondria are pleiotropic organelles central to an array of cellular pathways including metabolism, signal transduction, and programmed cell death. Mitochondria are also key drivers of mammalian immune responses, functioning as scaffolds for innate immune signaling, governing metabolic switches required for immune cell activation, and releasing agonists that promote inflammation. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a potent immunostimulatory agonist, triggering pro-inflammatory and type I interferon responses in a host of mammalian cell types. Here we review recent advances in how mtDNA is detected by nucleic acid sensors of the innate immune system upon release into the cytoplasm and extracellular space. We also discuss how the interplay between mtDNA release and sensing impacts cellular innate immune endpoints relevant to health and disease.
Friedreich's ataxia is an inherited disorder caused by depletion of frataxin (FXN), a mitochondrial protein required for iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) biogenesis. Cardiac dysfunction is the main cause of death. Yet pathogenesis, and, more generally, how the heart adapts to FXN loss, remains poorly understood, though it is expected to be linked to an energy deficit. We modified a transgenic (TG) mouse model of inducible FXN depletion that permits phenotypic evaluation of the heart at different FXN levels and focused on substrate-specific bioenergetics and stress signaling. When FXN protein in the TG heart was 17% of normal, bioenergetics and signaling were not different from control. When, 8 weeks later, FXN was similar to 97% depleted in the heart, TG heart mass and cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area were less, without evidence of fibrosis or apoptosis. mTORC1 signaling was activated, as was the integrated stress response, evidenced by greater phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha relative to total eIF2 alpha, and decreased protein translation. We interpret these results to suggest that, in TG hearts, an anabolic stimulus was constrained by eIF2 alpha phosphorylation. Cardiac contractility was maintained in the 97% FXN-depleted hearts, possibly contributed by an unexpected preservation of beta-oxidation, though pyruvate oxidation was lower. Bioenergetics alterations were matched by changes in the mitochondrial proteome, including a non-uniform decrease in abundance of ISC-containing proteins. Altogether, these findings suggest that the FXN-depleted heart can suppress a major ATP-demanding process such as protein translation, which, together with some preservation of beta-oxidation, could be adaptive, at least in the short term.
Early or late pubertal onset can lead to disease in adulthood, including cancer, obesity, type 2 diabetes, metabolic disorders, bone fractures, and psychopathologies. Thus, knowing the age at which puberty is attained is crucial as it can serve as a risk factor for future diseases. Pubertal development is divided into five stages of sexual maturation in boys and girls according to the standardized Tanner scale. We performed genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on the "Growth and Obesity Chilean Cohort Study" cohort composed of admixed children with mainly European and Native American ancestry. Using joint models that integrate time-to-event data with longitudinal trajectories of body mass index (BMI), we identified genetic variants associated with phenotypic transitions between pairs of Tanner stages. We identified $42$ novel significant associations, most of them in boys. The GWAS on Tanner $3\rightarrow 4$ transition in boys captured an association peak around the growth-related genes LARS2 and LIMD1 genes, the former of which causes ovarian dysfunction when mutated. The associated variants are expression and splicing Quantitative Trait Loci regulating gene expression and alternative splicing in multiple tissues. Further, higher individual Native American genetic ancestry proportions predicted a significantly earlier puberty onset in boys but not in girls. Finally, the joint models identified a longitudinal BMI parameter significantly associated with several Tanner stages' transitions, confirming the association of BMI with pubertal timing.
Human mitochondria harbour a circular, polyploid genome (mtDNA) encoding 11 messenger RNAs (mRNAs), two ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and 22 transfer RNAs (tRNAs). Mitochondrial transcription produces long, polycistronic transcripts that span almost the entire length of the genome, and hence contain all three types of RNAs. The primary transcripts then undergo a number of processing and maturation steps, which constitute key regulatory points of mitochondrial gene expression. The first step of mitochondrial RNA processing consists of the separation of primary transcripts into individual, functional RNA molecules and can occur by two distinct pathways. Both are carried out by dedicated molecular machineries that substantially differ from RNA processing enzymes found elsewhere. As a result, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Over the last years, genetic, biochemical and structural studies have identified key players involved in both RNA processing pathways and provided the first insights into the underlying mechanisms. Here, we review our current understanding of RNA processing in mammalian mitochondria and provide an outlook on open questions in the field.
Genetic sequencing has identified high-confidence ASD risk genes with loss-of-function mutations. How the haploinsufficiency of distinct ASD risk genes causes ASD remains to be elucidated. In this study, we examined the role of four top-ranking ASD risk genes, ADNP, KDM6B, CHD2, and MED13, in gene expression regulation. ChIP-seq analysis reveals that gene targets with the binding of these ASD risk genes at promoters are enriched in RNA processing and DNA repair. Many of these targets are found in ASD gene database (SFARI), and are involved in transcription regulation and chromatin remodeling. Common gene targets of these ASD risk genes include a network of high confidence ASD genes associated with gene expression regulation, such as CTNNB1 and SMARCA4. We further directly examined the transcriptional impact of the deficiency of these ASD risk genes. Our mRNA profiling with qPCR assays in cells with the knockdown of Adnp, Kdm6b, Chd2 or Med13 has revealed an intricate pattern of their cross-regulation, as well as their influence on the expression of other ASD genes. In addition, some synaptic genes, such as Snap25 and Nrxn1, are strongly regulated by deficiency of the four ASD risk genes, which could be through the direct binding at promoters or indirectly through the targets like Ctnnb1 or Smarca4. The identification of convergent and divergent gene targets that are regulated by multiple ASD risk genes will help to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying common and unique phenotypes associated with haploinsufficiency of ASD-associated genes.
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are increasingly recognized as playing a crucial role in regulating cancer progression and metastasis. These cells can be activated by long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), promoting the malignant biological processes of tumor cells. Therefore, it is essential to understand the regulatory relationship between CAFs and lncRNAs in cancers. Here, we identified CAF-related lncRNAs at the pan-cancer level to systematically predict their potential regulatory functions. The identified lncRNAs were also validated using various external data at both tissue and cellular levels. This study has revealed that these CAF-related lncRNAs exhibit expression perturbations in cancers and are highly correlated with the infiltration of stromal cells, particularly fibroblasts and endothelial cells. By prioritizing a list of CAF-related lncRNAs, we can further distinguish patient subtypes that show survival and molecular differences. In addition, we have developed a web server, CAFLnc (https://46906u5t63.zicp.fun/CAFLnc/), to visualize our results. In conclusion, CAF-related lncRNAs hold great potential as a valuable resource for comprehending lncRNA functions and advancing the identification of biomarkers for cancer progression and therapeutic targets in cancer treatment.
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a prevalent neurodegenerative disorder, predominantly affects individuals over the age of 65 and poses significant challenges in terms of effective management and treatment. The disease's pathogenesis involves complex molecular pathways including misfolded proteins accumulation, neuroinflammation, and synaptic dysfunction. Recent insights have highlighted the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) as critical regulators within these pathways, where they influence gene expression and contribute to the pathophysiological landscape of AD. Notably, emerging research has demonstrated that polyphenols, including curcumin, might modulate miRNA activity, thus offering a novel approach to mitigate AD symptoms and progression. This review explores the potential mechanisms through which polyphenols regulate miRNA expression and activity, specifically focusing on autophagy enhancement and inflammation reduction in the context of AD. We provide a detailed examination of key studies linking miRNA dysregulation to AD pathogenesis and discuss how polyphenols might correct these aberrations. The findings presented here underscore the therapeutic potential of polyphenols in AD treatment via miRNA modulation, pointing to new directions in disease management strategies and highlighting the need for targeted research into miRNA-based interventions.
Sandhoff disease (SD), a fatal and rare lysosomal storage disorder (LSD), is caused by a deficiency of the enzyme beta-hexosaminidase B and leads to severe accumulation of GM2 gangliosides in lysosomes, primarily within the central nervous system (CNS). This accumulation results in severe neurological impairment, lower motor neuron disease, and death. Currently, there are no effective therapies available for SD. Here, we explored the role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the spinal cord during disease progression in an established mouse model of SD and revealed the beneficial outcome of off-label treatment with the FDA-approved drug, 4-phenylbutyric acid (4- PBA). We analyzed the expression and localization of ER stress and cellular apoptosis markers, which revealed significant upregulation of these factors within motor neurons. Additionally, we observed a > 50% reduction in neuronal numbers throughout all spinal cord regions. Our studies also tested the impact of the chemical chaperone 4-PBA on ER stress in mice, and following administration, we observed significant improvements in motor neuromuscular function and life span throughout disease progression. 4-PBA treatment significantly reduced apoptosis in spinal cord neurons and increased the number of choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)-positive neurons, with little effect on astrogliosis or sensory interneurons. Overall, this study provides strong evidence for the role of chronic ER stress in the pathophysiology of SD and highlights 4-PBA as a promising therapeutic treatment for SD and potentially other related LSDs
Immunotherapy has revolutionized the treatment of tumors, but there are still a large number of patients who do not benefit from immunotherapy. Pericytes play an important role in remodeling the immune microenvironment. However, how pericytes affect the prognosis and treatment resistance of tumors is still unknown. This study jointly analyzed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data and bulk RNA sequencing data of multiple cancers to reveal pericyte function in the colorectal cancer microenvironment. Analyzing over 800 000 cells, it was found that colorectal cancer had more pericyte enrichment in tumor tissues than other cancers. We then combined the TCGA database with multiple public datasets and enrolled more than 1000 samples, finding that pericyte may be closely related to poor prognosis due to the higher epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and hypoxic characteristics. At the same time, patients with more pericytes have higher immune checkpoint molecule expressions and lower immune cell infiltration. Finally, the contributions of pericyte in poor treatment response have been demonstrated in multiple immunotherapy datasets (n = 453). All of these observations suggest that pericyte can be used as a potential biomarker to predict patient disease progression and immunotherapy response.
The Shoc2 scaffold protein is crucial in transmitting signals within the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)-mediated Extracellular signal-Regulated Kinase (ERK1/2) pathway. While the significance of Shoc2 in this pathway is well-established, the precise mechanisms through which Shoc2 governs signal transmission remain to be fully elucidated. Hereditary variants in Shoc2 are responsible for Noonan Syndrome with Loose anagen Hair (NSLH). However, due to the absence of known enzymatic activity in Shoc2, directly assessing how these variants affect its function is challenging. ERK1/2 phosphorylation is used as a primary parameter of Shoc2 function, but the impact of Shoc2 mutants on the pathway activation is unclear. This study investigates how the NSLH-associated Shoc2 variants influence EGFR signals in the context of the ERK1/2 and AKT downstream signaling pathways. We show that when the ERK1/2 pathway is a primary signaling pathway activated downstream of EGFR, Shoc2 variants cannot upregulate ERK1/2 phosphorylation to the level of the WT Shoc2. Yet, when the AKT and ERK1/2 pathways were activated, in cells expressing Shoc2 variants, ERK1/2 phosphorylation was higher than in cells expressing WT Shoc2. In cells expressing the Shoc2 NSLH mutants, we found that the AKT signaling pathway triggers the PAK activation, followed by phosphorylation of Raf-1/MEK1/2 and activation of the ERK1/2 signaling axis. Hence, our studies reveal a previously unrecognized feedback regulation downstream of the EGFR and provide additional evidence for the role of Shoc2 as a "gatekeeper" in controlling the selection of downstream effectors within the EGFR signaling network.
Identifying the aberrant expression of DUX4 in skeletal muscle as the cause of facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD) has led to rational therapeutic development and clinical trials. Several studies support the use of MRI characteristics and the expression of DUX4-regulated genes in muscle biopsies as biomarkers of FSHD disease activity and progression. We performed lower-extremity MRI and muscle biopsies in the mid-portion of the tibialis anterior (TA) muscles bilaterally in FSHD subjects and validated our prior reports of the strong association between MRI characteristics and expression of genes regulated by DUX4 and other gene categories associated with FSHD disease activity. We further show that measurements of normalized fat content in the entire TA muscle strongly predict molecular signatures in the mid-portion of the TA, indicating that regional biopsies can accurately measure progression in the whole muscle and providing a strong basis for inclusion of MRI and molecular biomarkers in clinical trial design. An unanticipated finding was the strong correlations of molecular signatures in the bilateral comparisons, including markers of B-cells and other immune cell populations, suggesting that a systemic immune cell infiltration of skeletal muscle might have a role in disease progression.
Background Genetic susceptibility to various chronic diseases has been shown to influence heart failure (HF) risk. However, the underlying biological pathways, particularly the role of leukocyte telomere length (LTL), are largely unknown. We investigated the impact of genetic susceptibility to chronic diseases and various traits on HF risk, and whether LTL mediates or modifies the pathways. Methods We conducted prospective cohort analyses on 404 883 European participants from the UK Biobank, including 9989 incident HF cases. Multivariable Cox regression was used to estimate associations between HF risk and 24 polygenic risk scores (PRSs) for various diseases or traits previously generated using a Bayesian approach. We assessed multiplicative interactions between the PRSs and LTL previously measured in the UK Biobank using quantitative PCR. Causal mediation analyses were conducted to estimate the proportion of the total effect of PRSs acting indirectly through LTL, an integrative marker of biological aging. Results We identified 9 PRSs associated with HF risk, including those for various cardiovascular diseases or traits, rheumatoid arthritis (P = 1.3E-04), and asthma (P = 1.8E-08). Additionally, longer LTL was strongly associated with decreased HF risk (P-trend = 1.7E-08). Notably, LTL strengthened the asthma-HF relationship significantly (P-interaction = 2.8E-03). However, LTL mediated only 1.13% (P < 0.001) of the total effect of the asthma PRS on HF risk. Conclusions Our findings shed light onto the shared genetic susceptibility between HF risk, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and other traits. Longer LTL strengthened the genetic effect of asthma in the pathway to HF. These results support consideration of LTL and PRSs in HF risk prediction.
Makorin RING finger protein 3 (MKRN3) is a key inhibitor of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. The association between MKRN3 gene variants and central precocious puberty (CPP) has been repeatedly examined. In a recent study, MKRN3 has been assigned a role of tumor suppressor in lung carcinogenesis. Therefore, it is hypothesized that MKRN3 may be the link between CPP and lung cancer (LC), and certain MKRN3 gene variants may affect individuals' susceptibility to CPP and LC. The rs12441287, rs6576457 and rs2239669 in the MKRN3 gene were selected as the target variants. Sanger sequencing was applied to genotype them in two sets of case-control cohorts, namely 384 CPP girls and 422 healthy girls, 550 LC patients and 800 healthy controls. The results showed that rs6576457 but not rs12441287 or rs2239669 was significantly associated with the risk of CPP and LC. Their association with CPP risk was further confirmed in the following meta-analysis. Subsequent functional assays revealed that the rs6576457 genotypes were correlated with differentially expressed MKRN3, and the rs6576457 alleles affected the transcription repressor Oct-1 binding affinity to the MKRN3 promoter. Collectively, the MKRN3 gene rs6576457 may participate in the CPP pathology and LC tumorigenesis in the Hubei Chinese population. However, the present findings should be validated in additional investigations with larger samples from different ethnic populations.
The metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the cancers with high incidence, poor survival, and limited treatment. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the first step by which an early tumor converts to an invasive one. Studying the underlying mechanisms of EMT can help the understanding of cancer metastasis and improve the treatment. In this study, 1013 NSCLC patients and 123 NSCLC cell lines are deeply analyzed for the potential roles of alternative polyadenylation (APA) in the EMT process. A trend of shorter 3 '-UTRs (three prime untranslated region) is discovered in the mesenchymal samples. The identification of EMT-related APA events highlights the proximal poly(A) selection of CARM1. It is a pathological biomarker of mesenchymal tumor and cancer metastasis through losing miRNA binding to upregulate the EMT inducer of CARM1 and releasing miRNAs to downregulate the EMT inhibitor of RBM47. The crucial role of this APA event in EMT also guides its effect on drug responses. The patients with shorter 3 '-UTR of CARM1 are more benefit from chemotherapy drugs, especially cisplatin. A stratification of NSCLC patients based on this APA event is useful for chemotherapy design in future clinics.
Cellular senescence (CS) is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the mechanisms through which CS contributes to AD pathogenesis remain poorly understood. We found that CS level in AD was higher compared with the healthy control group. Transcriptome-based differential expression analysis identified 113 CS-related genes in blood and 410 in brain tissue as potential candidate genes involved in AD. To further explore the causal role of these genes, an integrative mendelian randomization analysis was conducted, combining AD genome-wide association study summary statistics with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and DNA methylation quantitative trait loci (mQTL) data from blood samples, which identified five putative AD-causal genes (CENPW, EXOSC9, HSPB11, SLC44A2, and SLFN12) and 18 corresponding DNA methylation probes. Additionally, integrative analysis between eQTLs and mQTLs from blood uncovered two genes and 12 corresponding regulatory elements involved in AD. Furthermore, two genes (CDKN2B and ITGAV) were prioritized as putative causal genes in brain tissue and were validated through in vitro experiments. The multi-omics integration study revealed the potential role and underlying biological mechanisms of CS driven by genetic predisposition in AD. This study contributed to fundamental understanding of CS in AD pathogenesis and facilitated the identification of potential therapeutic targets for AD prevention and treatment.
Splicing factors (SFs) are the major RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and key molecules that regulate the splicing of mRNA molecules through binding to mRNAs. The expression of splicing factors is frequently deregulated in different cancer types, causing the generation of oncogenic proteins involved in cancer hallmarks. In this study, we investigated the genes that encode RNA-binding proteins and identified potential splicing factors that contribute to the aberrant splicing applying a random forest classification model. The result suggested 56 splicing factors were related to the prognosis of 13 cancers, two SF complexes in liver hepatocellular carcinoma, and one SF complex in esophageal carcinoma. Further systematic bioinformatics studies on these cancer prognostic splicing factors and their related alternative splicing events revealed the potential regulations in a cancer-specific manner. Our analysis found high ILF2-ILF3 expression correlates with poor prognosis in LIHC through alternative splicing. These findings emphasize the importance of SFs as potential indicators for prognosis or targets for therapeutic interventions. Their roles in cancer exhibit complexity and are contingent upon the specific context in which they operate. This recognition further underscores the need for a comprehensive understanding and exploration of the role of SFs in different types of cancer, paving the way for their potential utilization in prognostic assessments and the development of targeted therapies.
Purpose:The aim of this study was to determine the genetic cause of early onset autosomal dominant hearing loss segregating in five-generation kindred of Chinese descent and provide preimplantation genetic testing (PGT)for them. Methods: Clinical examination, pedigree analysis and exome sequencing were carried out on the family. Minigene-based splicing analysis, in vivo RNA analysis and protein structure prediction by molecular modeling were conducted on the candidate variant. PGT for the causative variation and chromosome aneuploidis based on SNP analysis has been used for avoidance of hearing loss in this family. Results: All the affected individuals presented with moderate down-sloping hearing loss and whole-exome sequencing identified a novel splice-site variant c.5383+6T>A in the tested subjects within the TECTA locus. Genotyping of all the 32 family members confirmed segregation of this variant and the hearing loss phenotype in the extended family. Functional analysis of RNA and molecular modeling indicates that c.5383+6T>A is a pathogenic splice-site variant and should be considered as genetic cause of the hearing loss. Furthermore, a successful singleton pregnancy with no variation in TECTA c.5383+6 was established and a healthy male child was born by PGT. Conclusion: We have identified a novel variant c.5383+6T>A in TECTA ZA-ZP inter-domain, which could be attributable to the early-onset autosomal dominant hearing loss. The implications of our study are valuable in elucidating the disrupted RNA splicing and uncovering the genetic cause of hearing loss with TECTA pathogenic variants, as well as providing reproductive approaches to healthy offspring.
Mitochondria are subcellular organelles essential for life. Beyond their role in producing energy, mitochondria govern various physiological mechanisms, encompassing energy generation, metabolic processes, apoptotic events, and immune responses. Mitochondria also contain genetic material that is susceptible to various forms of damage. Mitochondrial double-stranded breaks (DSB) are toxic lesions that the nucleus repairs promptly. Nevertheless, the significance of DSB repair in mammalian mitochondria is controversial. This review presents an updated view of the available research on the consequences of mitochondrial DNA DSB from the molecular to the cellular level. We discuss the crucial function of mitochondrial DNA damage in regulating processes such as senescence, integrated stress response, and innate immunity. Lastly, we discuss the potential role of mitochondrial DNA DSB in mediating the cellular consequences of ionizing radiations, the standard of care in treating solid tumors.
The ubiquitin-proteasome system mediates the degradation of a wide variety of proteins. Proteasome dysfunction is associated with neurodegenerative diseases and neurodevelopmental disorders in humans. Here we identified mutations in PSMC5, an AAA ATPase subunit of the proteasome 19S regulatory particle, in individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders, which were initially considered as variants of unknown significance. We have now found heterozygotes with the following mutations: P320R (6 individuals), R325W, Q160A, and one nonsense mutation at Q69. We focused on understanding the functional consequence of PSMC5 insufficiency and the P320R mutation in cells and found that both impair proteasome function and activate apoptosis. Interestingly, the P320R mutation impairs proteasome function by weakening the association between the 19S regulatory particle and the 20S core particle. Our study supports that proteasome dysfunction is the pathogenic cause of neurodevelopmental disorders in individuals carrying PSMC5 variants.
In several cases of mitochondrial diseases, the underlying genetic and bioenergetic causes of reduced oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) in mitochondrial dysfunction are well understood. However, there is still limited knowledge about the specific cellular outcomes and factors involved for each gene and mutation, which contributes to the lack of effective treatments for these disorders. This study focused on fibroblasts from a patient with Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy (ADOA) plus syndrome harboring a mutation in the Optic Atrophy 1 (OPA1) gene. By combining functional and transcriptomic approaches, we investigated the mitochondrial function and identified cellular phenotypes associated with the disease. Our findings revealed that fibroblasts with the OPA1 mutation exhibited a disrupted mitochondrial network and function, leading to altered mitochondrial dynamics and reduced autophagic response. Additionally, we observed a premature senescence phenotype in these cells, suggesting a previously unexplored role of the OPA1 gene in inducing senescence in ADOA plus patients. This study provides novel insights into the mechanisms underlying mitochondrial dysfunction in ADOA plus and highlights the potential importance of senescence in disease progression.
How ancestry-associated genetic variance affects disparities in the risk of polygenic diseases and influences the identification of disease-associated genes warrants a deeper understanding. We hypothesized that the discovery of genes associated with polygenic diseases may be limited by the overreliance on single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based genomic investigation, as most significant variants identified in genome-wide SNP association studies map to introns and intergenic regions of the genome. To overcome such potential limitations, we developed a gene-constrained, function-based analytical method centered on high-risk variants (hrV) that encode frameshifts, stopgains or splice site disruption. We analyzed the total number of hrV per gene in populations of different ancestry, representing a total of 185 934 subjects. Using this analysis, we developed a quantitative index of hrV (hrVI) across 20 428 genes within each population. We then applied hrVI analysis to the discovery of genes associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), a polygenic disease with ancestry-related disparity. HrVI profiling and gene-to-gene comparisons of ancestry-specific hrV between the case (20 781 subjects) and control (24 440 subjects) populations in the T2DM national repository identified 57 genes associated with T2DM, 40 of which were discoverable only by ancestry-specific analysis. These results illustrate how a function-based, ancestry-specific analysis of genetic variations can accelerate the identification of genes associated with polygenic diseases. Besides T2DM, such analysis may facilitate our understanding of the genetic basis for other polygenic diseases that are also greatly influenced by environmental and behavioral factors, such as obesity, hypertension and Alzheimer's disease.
How ancestry-associated genetic variance affects disparities in the risk of polygenic diseases and influences the identification of disease-associated genes warrants a deeper understanding. We hypothesized that the discovery of genes associated with polygenic diseases may be limited by the overreliance on single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based genomic investigation, as most significant variants identified in genome-wide SNP association studies map to introns and intergenic regions of the genome. To overcome such potential limitations, we developed a gene-constrained, function-based analytical method centered on high-risk variants (hrV) that encode frameshifts, stopgains or splice site disruption. We analyzed the total number of hrV per gene in populations of different ancestry, representing a total of 185 934 subjects. Using this analysis, we developed a quantitative index of hrV (hrVI) across 20 428 genes within each population. We then applied hrVI analysis to the discovery of genes associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), a polygenic disease with ancestry-related disparity. HrVI profiling and gene-to-gene comparisons of ancestry-specific hrV between the case (20 781 subjects) and control (24 440 subjects) populations in the T2DM national repository identified 57 genes associated with T2DM, 40 of which were discoverable only by ancestry-specific analysis. These results illustrate how a function-based, ancestry-specific analysis of genetic variations can accelerate the identification of genes associated with polygenic diseases. Besides T2DM, such analysis may facilitate our understanding of the genetic basis for other polygenic diseases that are also greatly influenced by environmental and behavioral factors, such as obesity, hypertension and Alzheimer's disease.
Breast cancer (BRCA) is a highly heterogeneous disease, with significant differences in prognosis among patients. Existing biomarkers and prognostic models have limited ability to predict BRCA prognosis. Moonlighting genes regulate tumor progression and are associated with cancer prognosis. This study aimed to construct a moonlighting gene-based prognostic model for BRCA. We obtained differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in BRCA from The Cancer Genome Atlas and intersected them with moonlighting genes from MoonProt to acquire differential moonlighting genes. GO and KEGG results showed main enrichment of these genes in the response of BRCA cells to environmental stimuli and pentose phosphate pathway. Based on moonlighting genes, we conducted drug prediction and validated results through cellular experiments. After ABCB1 knockdown, viability and proliferation of BRCA cells were significantly enhanced. Based on differential moonlighting genes, BRCA was divided into three subgroups, among which cluster2 had the highest survival rate and immunophenoscore and relatively low tumor mutation burden. TP53 had the highest mutation frequency in cluster2 and cluster3, while PIK3CA had a higher mutation frequency in cluster1, with the majority being missense mutations. Subsequently, we established an 11-gene prognostic model in the training set based on DEGs among subgroups using univariate Cox regression, LASSO regression, and multivariable Cox regression analyses. Model prognostic performance was verified in GEO, METABRIC and ICGC validation sets. In summary, this study obtained three BRCA moonlighting gene-related subtypes and constructed an 11-gene prognostic model. The 11-gene BRCA prognostic model has good predictive performance, guiding BRCA prognosis for clinical doctors.
Purpose Pathogenesis and the associated risk factors of cataracts, glaucoma, and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) remain unclear. We aimed to investigate causal relationships between circulating cytokine levels and the development of these diseases.Patients and methods Genetic instrumental variables for circulating cytokines were derived from a genome-wide association study of 8293 European participants. Summary-level data for AMD, glaucoma, and senile cataract were obtained from the FinnGen database. The inverse variance weighted (IVW) was the main Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis method. The Cochran's Q, MR-Egger regression, and MR pleiotropy residual sum and outlier test were used for sensitivity analysis.Results Based on the IVW method, MR analysis demonstrated five circulating cytokines suggestively associated with AMD (SCGF-beta, 1.099 [95%CI, 1.037-1.166], P = 0.002; SCF, 1.155 [95%CI, 1.015-1.315], P = 0.029; MCP-1, 1.103 [95%CI, 1.012-1.202], P = 0.026; IL-10, 1.102 [95%CI, 1.012-1.200], P = 0.025; eotaxin, 1.086 [95%CI, 1.002-1.176], P = 0.044), five suggestively linked with glaucoma (MCP-1, 0.945 [95%CI, 0.894-0.999], P = 0.047; IL1ra, 0.886 [95%CI, 0.809-0.969], P = 0.008; IL-1 beta, 0.866 [95%CI, 0.762-0.983], P = 0.027; IL-9, 0.908 [95%CI, 0.841-0.980], P = 0.014; IL2ra, 1.065 [95%CI, 1.004-1.130], P = 0.035), and four suggestively associated with senile cataract (TRAIL, 1.043 [95%CI, 1.009-1.077], P = 0.011; IL-16, 1.032 [95%CI, 1.001-1.064], P = 0.046; IL1ra, 0.942 [95%CI, 0.887-0.999], P = 0.047; FGF-basic, 1.144 [95%CI, 1.052-1.244], P = 0.002). Furthermore, sensitivity analysis results supported the above associations.Conclusion This study highlights the involvement of several circulating cytokines in the development ophthalmic diseases and holds potential as viable pharmacological targets for these diseases.
De novo variants in the Cytoplasmic FMR1-interacting protein 2 (CYFIP2) have been repeatedly associated with neurodevelopmental disorders and epilepsy, underscoring its critical role in brain development and function. While CYFIP2's role in regulating actin polymerization as part of the WAVE regulatory complex (WRC) is well-established, its additional molecular functions remain relatively unexplored. In this study, we performed unbiased quantitative proteomic analysis, revealing 278 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the forebrain of Cyfip2 knock-out embryonic mice compared to wild-type mice. Unexpectedly, these DEPs, in conjunction with previously identified CYFIP2 brain interactors, included not only other WRC components but also numerous proteins associated with membraneless organelles (MLOs) involved in mRNA processing and translation within cells, including the nucleolus, stress granules, and processing bodies. Additionally, single-cell transcriptomic analysis of the Cyfip2 knock-out forebrain revealed gene expression changes linked to cellular stress responses and MLOs. We also observed morphological changes in MLOs in Cyfip2 knock-out brains and CYFIP2 knock-down cells under basal and stress conditions. Lastly, we demonstrated that CYFIP2 knock-down in cells, potentially through WRC-dependent actin regulation, suppressed the phosphorylation levels of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2 alpha), thereby enhancing protein synthesis. These results suggest a physical and functional connection between CYFIP2 and various MLO proteins and also extend CYFIP2's role within the WRC from actin regulation to influencing eIF2 alpha phosphorylation and protein synthesis. With these dual functions, CYFIP2 may fine-tune the balance between MLO formation/dynamics and protein synthesis, a crucial aspect of proper mRNA processing and translation.
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNAs that have been increasingly recognized for their significant roles in the progression of cancer. Distinct miRNAs exhibit diverse functions attributed to variations in their sequences. As a result of possessing highly homologous seed sequences, these miRNAs target overlapping or similar gene sets, thus performing analogous roles. However, different from this sight, our study discovered that miR-135a-5p and miR-135b-5p, despite differing by only one nucleotide, exhibit distinct functional roles. Using non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as a paradigm, our findings unveiled the downregulation of miR-135a-5p and upregulation of miR-135b-5p within NSCLC through TCGA database. Consequently, we further investigated their functional differences in A549 cells. Overexpression of miR-135b-5p enhanced the proliferation and migration capabilities of A549 cells, whereas miR-135a-5p transfection exhibited the opposite effect. We demonstrated that the activation of specific enhancers serves as a crucial mechanism underlying the disparate functions exerted by miR-135a-5p and miR-135b-5p in the context of NSCLC, consequently instigating a shift from inhibition to activation in NSCLC progression. Finally, we validated through animal experiments that miR-135b-5p promoted tumor progression, while miR-135a-5p exerted inhibitory effects on NSCLC development. This study offers a novel perspective for researchers to elucidate functional disparities exhibited by highly homologous miRNAs (miR-135a-5p and miR-135b-5p) in the context of NSCLC, along with the transition from inhibitory to progressive states in NSCLC. This study provides a solid foundation for future investigations into the functional roles of highly homologous miRNAs in pathological situation.
Melanoma, renowned for its aggressive behavior and resistance to conventional treatments, stands as a formidable challenge in the oncology landscape. The dynamic and complex interplay between cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment has gained significant attention, revealing Melanoma-Associated Fibroblasts (MAFs) as central players in disease progression. The heterogeneity of MAFs endows them with a dual role in melanoma. This exhaustive review seeks to not only shed light on the multifaceted roles of MAFs in orchestrating tumor-promoting inflammation but also to explore their involvement in antitumor immunity. By unraveling novel mechanisms underlying MAF functions, this review aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of their impact on melanoma development. Additionally, it delves into the potential of leveraging MAFs for innovative immunotherapeutic strategies, offering new avenues for enhancing treatment outcomes in the challenging realm of melanoma therapeutics.
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a common form of congenital heart disease. The MYH6 gene has important effects on cardiovascular growth and development, but the effect of variants in the MYH6 gene promoter on ductus arteriosus is unknown. DNA was extracted from blood samples of 721 subjects (428 patients with isolated and sporadic PDA and 293 healthy controls) and analyzed by sequencing for MYH6 gene promoter region variants. Cellular function experiments with three cell lines (HEK-293, HL-1, and H9C2 cells) and bioinformatics analyses were performed to verify their effects on gene expression. In the MYH6 gene promoter, 11 variants were identified. Four variants were found only in patients with PDA and 2 of them (g.3434G>C and g.4524C>T) were novel. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that the transcription factors bound by the promoter variants were significantly altered in comparison to the wild-type in all three cell lines. Dual luciferase reporter showed that all the 4 variants reduced the transcriptional activity of the MYH6 gene promoter (P < 0.05). Prediction of transcription factors bound by the variants indicated that these variants alter the transcription factor binding sites. These pathological alterations most likely affect the contraction of the smooth muscle of ductus arteriosus, leading to PDA. This study is the first to focus on variants at the promoter region of the MYH6 gene in PDA patients with cellular function tests. Therefore, this study provides new insights to understand the genetic basis and facilitates further studies on the mechanism of PDA formation.
