Many genes in the human genome encode proteins that are dosage sensitive, meaning they require protein levels within a narrow range to properly execute function. To investigate if clinically relevant variation in protein levels impacts the same downstream pathways in human disease, we generated cell models of two SETBP1 syndromes: Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome (SGS) and SETBP1 haploinsufficiency disease (SHD), where SGS is caused by too much protein, and SHD is caused by not enough SETBP1. Using patient and sex-matched healthy first-degree relatives from both SGS and SHD SETBP1 cases, we assessed how SETBP1 protein dosage affects downstream pathways in human forebrain progenitor cells. We find that extremes of SETBP1 protein dose reciprocally influence important signalling molecules such as AKT, suggesting that the SETBP1 protein operates within a narrow dosage range and that extreme doses are detrimental. We identified SETBP1 nuclear bodies as interacting with the nuclear lamina and suggest that SETBP1 may organize higher order chromatin structure via links to the nuclear envelope. SETBP1 protein doses may exert significant influence on global gene expression patterns via these SETBP1 nuclear bodies. This work provides evidence for the importance of SETBP1 protein dose in human brain development, with implications for two neurodevelopmental disorders.
The choroid plexuses (CP) are highly vascularized structures that project into the ventricles of the vertebrate brain. The polarized epithelia of the CP produce cerebrospinal fluid by transporting water and ions into the ventricles from the blood and normally secrete a large number of proteins. We assessed the feasibility of selective CP transduction with recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) gene therapy vectors for treatment of lysosomal storage disease (LSD), a broad category of neurometabolic illness associated with significant burdens to affected patients and their families. There are no ideal or complete therapeutic options currently available, especially for the central nervous system manifestations of LSDs. Alpha-mannosidosis (AMD) is an autosomal recessive prototypical LSD caused by deficiency of lysosomal alpha-mannosidase and characterized by cerebellar ataxia, neurocognitive disability, facial and skeletal abnormalities, hearing impairment, and mild immune deficiency. In a murine model of AMD, we compared the biochemical effects of CSF-directed rAAV serotypes 1, 4, 5, 6, and 9. Recombinant AAV1 and rAAV6, two closely related serotypes whose capsid sequences differ by only six amino acids, showed the most robust transduction of CP in mouse brain, consistent with their transduction of CPE in nonhuman primates and cats, as well as in other structures. We found restoration of LAMAN enzyme activity comparable to or higher than AMD heterozygote levels in the brain globally (olfactory bulb, cortex, cerebellum, brainstem). Further IND-generating preclinical experiments will advance rAAV6-LAMAN, which appears to be the most promising choroid plexus-targeting candidate serotype for future clinical translation to treat AMD.
Genomic imprinting is the parent-of-origin dependent monoallelic expression of genes often associated with regions of germline-derived DNA methylation that are maintained as differentially methylated regions (gDMRs) in somatic tissues. This form of epigenetic regulation is highly conserved in mammals and is thought to have co-evolved with placentation. Tissue-specific gDMRs have been identified in human placenta, suggesting that species-specific imprinting dependent on unorthodox epigenetic establishment or maintenance may be more widespread than previously anticipated. Non-canonical imprinting, reliant on differential allelic H3K27me3 enrichment, has been reported in mouse and rat pre-implantation embryos, often overlapping long terminal repeat (LTR)-derived promoters. These non-canonical imprints lose parental allele-specific H3K27me3 specificity, subsequently gaining DNA methylation on the same allele in extra-embryonic tissues resulting in placenta-specific, somatically acquired maternal DMRs. To determine if similar non-canonical imprinting is present in the human placenta, we interrogated allelic DNA methylation for a selected number of loci, including (i) the human orthologues of non-canonical imprinted regions in mouse and rat, (ii) promoters of human LTR-derived transcripts, and (iii) CpG islands with intermediate placenta-specific methylation that are unmethylated in gametes and pre-implantation embryos. We failed to identify any non-canonical imprints in the human placenta whole villi samples. Furthermore, the assayed genes were shown to be biallelically expressed in human pre-implantation embryos, indicating they are not imprinted at earlier time points. Together, our work reiterates the continued evolution of placenta-specific imprinting in mammals, which we suggest is linked to epigenetic differences during the maternal-to-embryo transition and species-specific integration of retrotransposable elements.
Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (WS2) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss, blue iris, and abnormal pigmentation of the hair and skin. WS2 is genetically heterogeneous, often resulting from pathogenic mutations in SOX10 gene. We identified a novel heterozygous frameshift mutation in SOX10 (NM_006941.4: c.22delT, p.S8Rfs*5) in a two-generation Chinese family with WS2 through whole exome sequencing. This mutation was present in both the proband, who exhibited typical features of hearing loss and pigmentation abnormalities, and his father, who showed only mild facial features. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that the frameshift mutation leads to a reduced expression levels of SOX10 in the peripheral blood of mutation carriers. Our findings expand the spectrum of pathogenic mutations in SOX10 associated with WS2, providing valuable information for prenatal diagnosis and preimplantation screening, and underscore the role of genetic diagnosis in identifying atypical patients.
Cartilage degradation is the hallmark of osteoarthritis (OA). The purpose of this study was to identify and validate differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in human articular cartilage that could serve as potential therapeutic targets for hip OA. We performed transcriptomic profiling in a discovery cohort (12 OA-free and 72 hip OA-affected cartilage) and identified 179 DEGs between OA-free and OA-affected cartilage after correcting for multiple testing (P < 2.97 x 10-6). Pathway and network analyses found eight hub genes to be associated with hip OA (ASPN, COL1A2, MXRA5, P3H1, PCOLCE, SDC1, SPARC, and TLR2), which were all confirmed using qPCR in a validation cohort (36 OA-free and 62 hip OA-affected cartilage) (P < 6.25 x 10-3). Our data showed that dysregulation of extracellular matrix formation and imbalance in the proportion of collagen chains may contribute to the development of hip OA, and SDC1 could be a promising potential therapeutic target. These findings provided a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms for hip OA and may assist in developing targeted treatment strategies.
Myotonic Dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is a multisystem disease affecting many tissues, including skeletal muscle, heart, and brain. DM2 is caused by unstable expansion of CCTG repeats in an intron 1 of a gene coding for cellular nuclear binding protein (CNBP). The expanded CCTG repeats cause DM2 pathology due to the accumulation of RNA CCUG repeats, which affect RNA processing in patients' cells. We have previously shown that mutant CCUG repeats reduce CNBP protein in DM2 patients. Reducing Cnbp in Cnbp KO mouse model causes late skeletal muscle atrophy. In this study, we examined if the reduction of Cnbp affects the Central Nervous System (CNS). MRI and DTI analyses showed that total brain volume and grey matter are reduced in Cnbp KO mice, while mean, radial and axonal brain diffusivity is increased. The morphological changes in the brains of Cnbp KO mice are accompanied by reduced stereotypic behavior, anxiety and neuromotor defects. These findings suggest that the reduction of CNBP contributes to CNS pathology in DM2. Since CNBP stability is regulated by pAMPK-dependent phosphorylation, we examined protein levels of pAMPK in DM2 cells and found that the active pAMPK is reduced in DM2. Interaction of CNBP with pAMPK and stability of CNBP protein are also decreased in DM2. Our data show that a small molecule AMPK activator A769662 corrects CNBP stability and normalizes CNBP targets in DM2 fibroblasts. Thus, activators of AMPK could potentially be developed as therapeutics to correct CNBP and reduce muscle and brain atrophies in DM2.
While de novo missense variants in the BTB domains of atypical RhoGTPase RHOBTB2 cause a severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, de novo missense variants in the GTPase domain or bi-allelic truncating variants are associated with more variable neurodevelopmental and seizure phenotypes. Apart from the observation of RHOBTB2 abundance resulting from BTB-domain variants and increased seizure susceptibility in Drosophila overexpressing RhoBTB, our knowledge on RHOBTB2-related pathomechanisms is limited. We now found enrichment for ion channels among the differentially expressed genes from RNA-Seq on fly heads overexpressing RhoBTB. Subsequent genetic interaction experiments confirmed a functional link between RhoBTB and paralytic, the orthologue of human sodium channels, including epilepsy associated SCN1A, in vivo. We then performed patch-clamp recordings on mature neurons differentiated from human induced pluripotent stem cells with either homozygous frameshifts or patient-specific heterozygous missense variants in the GTPase or the BTB domains. This revealed significantly altered neuronal activity and excitability resulting from BTB domain variants but not from GTPase domain variants or upon complete loss of RHOBTB2. Our study indicates a role of deregulated ion channels in the pathogenesis of RHOBTB2-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy and points to specific pathomechanisms underlying the observed genotype-phenotype correlations regarding variant zygosity, location and nature.
This study investigates the influence of miR-128-2-5p within serum-derived exosomes (Exos) on COL6A2 expression and its implications in postmenopausal osteoporosis (POMP). Utilizing bioinformatics analysis, we identified 1317 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), primarily enriched in the focal adhesion pathway-a critical regulator of osteoblast adhesion. A significant gene, COL6A2, emerged as notably downregulated in POMP, possessing potential as a diagnostic marker. Predictive analysis linked the upstream miRNA miR-128-2-5p, highly enriched in Exos, with the regulation of COL6A2. Experimentally, Exos from POMP patients demonstrated elevated miR-128-2-5p levels, which inhibited COL6A2 expression in vitro, reducing osteoblast adhesion and exacerbating osteoporotic conditions. These findings highlight the pivotal role of exosomal miR-128-2-5p in bone metabolism, suggesting a novel molecular mechanism and a potential therapeutic target in POMP.
The most severe form of male infertility is idiopathic non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA), a complete sperm absence in the ejaculate. We performed exome sequencing in the Croatian infertile brothers with NOA and found a variant in DMRT1 (Doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1) gene that was further assessed by the EMSA assay and molecular dynamic simulations. We additionally screened for DMRT1 mutations in 1940 infertile men diagnosed with spermatogenic failure, 644 normozoospermic controls, and 105 females with primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) recruited to the GEnetics of Male INfertility Initiative (GEMINI) or Estonian Andrology (ESTAND) cohorts. DMRT1 p.Pro74Leu (chr9:g.842059C > T) variant was detected in infertile brothers in the highly conserved position within the DNA binding DM domain of the protein. EMSA assay showed reduced DNA binding of DMRT1(P74L) and molecular dynamic simulations showed differences in structural and dynamical properties between the wild type protein and DMRT1P74L. Plausible disease-causing DMRT1 variants were only identified in infertile men (13/1940; 0.67%), and none in 639 fertile controls. Burden testing showed an excess of rare deleterious DM domain mutations in the infertility cohort compared to gnomAD v.4.0 population-based controls (Fisher's exact test, p = 1.44 x 10(-5)). Three rare deleterious variants in DMRT1 were found in 104 cases of POI. The findings of this study strengthen the evidence of DMRT1 variants being a causal factor for male infertility and provide the distribution of likely pathogenic variants across the gene. This is also the first study to suggest that DMRT1 variants may also be linked to POI.
Constitutively active mutants of BRAF cause cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome, characterized by growth and developmental defects, cardiac malformations, facial features, cutaneous manifestations, and mental retardation. An animal model of human CFC syndrome, the systemic BrafQ241R/+ mutant mouse, has been reported to exhibit multiple CFC syndrome-like phenotypes. In this study, we analyzed the effects of Braf mutations on neural function, separately from their effects on developmental processes. To this end, we generated Braf mutant mice expressing BRAFQ241R specifically in mature excitatory neurons (n-BrafQ241R/+). We found no growth retardation or cardiac malformations in n-BrafQ241R/+ mice, indicating normal development. Behavioral analysis revealed that n-BrafQ241R/+ mice exhibited reduced home cage activity and learning disability, which were similar to those of systemic BrafQ241R/+ mice. The active form of ERK was increased in the hippocampus of n-BrafQ241R/+ mice, whereas basal synaptic transmission and synaptic plasticity in hippocampal Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses seems to be normal. Transcriptome analysis of the hippocampal tissue revealed significant changes in the expression of genes involved in regulation of the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway, synaptic function and memory formation. These data suggest that the neuronal dysfunction observed in the systemic CFC mouse model is due to the disruption of homeostasis of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway by the activated Braf mutant after maturation, rather than abnormal development of the brain. A similar mechanism may be possible in human CFC syndrome.
Spinal Muscular Atrophy is an autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations and deletions within the SMN1 gene, with predominantly childhood onset. Although primarily a motor neuron disease, defects in non-neuronal tissues are described in both patients and mouse models. Here, we have undertaken a detailed study of the heart in the Smn2B/- mouse models of SMA, and reveal a thinning of the ventriclar walls as previously described in more severe mouse models of SMA. However most structural changes are resolved by accounting for the smaller body size of the SMA mouse, as was also confirmed in the SMN triangle 7 model. Echocardiography revealed increased systolic function, which was particularly pronounced in subsets of mice and an increase in global longitudinal strain, collectively indicative of increased cardiac stress in the Smn2B/- mouse model. We have used TMT proteomics to perform a longitudinal study of the proteome of the hearts of Smn2B/- mice and reveal a progressive dysregulation of LXR/RXR signalling which is a regulator of lipid metabolism. We further show consistent perturbations in lipid metabolism in the Smn2B/-, Smn-/-;SMN2;Smn Delta 7and Smn Delta 7/Delta 7;SMN2 mouse models of SMA on the day of birth. This work indicates that although structural changes in the heart can be overstated by failing to account for body size, there are functional defects which could predispose the heart to subsequent failure. We identify a common molecular signature across mouse models pointing to a dysregulation in lipid metabolism, and suggest that manipulation of LXR/RXR signalling offers an opportunity to impact upon these pathways.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons (DA) which can be caused by environmental and genetic factors. lncRNAs have emerged as an important regulatory layer in neurodegenerative disorders, including PD. In this study, we investigated and validated lncRNAs that may serve as diagnostic or therapeutic targets for PD. Key genes associated with midbrain and DA cells were screened by differential gene expression analysis on GSE213100 dataset and candidate lncRNAs were selected for further examination. P19 cells were differentiated into DA cells and received treatment with MPP+ to induce PD-like cytotoxic events, which were confirmed by light microscopy, RT-qPCR, immunofluorescence and flow cytometry. Then, the cells were used to investigate the changes of lncRNAs Malat1, Norad, Snhg1 and Meg3. Here we found that the neuronal phenotype was mainly observed on the 12th day of differentiation and the number of DA markers significantly decreased in PD model cells compared with the control group. Moreover, the expression levels of Meg3, Norad, and Snhg1 were decreased by MPP+ whereas Malat1 level was noticeably higher in MPP+ cells compared to DA cells and the control group. In conclusion, the expression level of lncRNAs was able to show a significant difference between differentiated dopaminergic cells and their Parkinsonian model, thereby improving our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of PD.
Background Individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF; a recessive disorder) have an increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). Evidence suggests individuals with a single CFTR variant may also have increased CRC risk.Methods Using population-based studies (GECCO, CORECT, CCFR, and ARIC; 53 785 CRC cases and 58 010 controls), we tested for an association between the most common CFTR variant (Phe508del) and CRC risk. For replication, we used whole exome sequencing data from UK Biobank (UKB; 5126 cases and 20 504 controls matched 4:1 based on genetic distance, age, and sex), and extended our analyses to all other heterozygous CFTR variants annotated as CF-causing.Results In our meta-analysis of GECCO-CORECT-CCFR-ARIC, the odds ratio (OR) for CRC risk associated with Phe508del was 1.11 (P = 0.010). In our UKB replication, the OR for CRC risk associated with Phe508del was 1.28 (P = 0.002). The sequencing data from UKB also revealed an association between the presence of any other single CF-causing variant (excluding Phe508del) and CRC risk (OR = 1.33; P = 0.030). When stratifying CFTR variants by functional class, class I variants (no protein produced) had a stronger association (OR = 1.77; p = 0.002), while class II variants (misfolding and retention of the protein in the endoplasmic reticulum) other than Phe508del (OR = 1.75; p = 0.107) had similar effect size as Phe508del, and variants in classes III-VI had non-significant ORs less than 1.0 and/or were not present in cases.Conclusions CF-causing heterozygous variants, especially class I variants, are associated with a modest but statistically significant increased CRC risk. More research is needed to explain the biology underlying these associations.
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) complications pose a significant global health challenge. Omics technologies have been employed to investigate these complications and identify the biological pathways involved. In this review, we focus on four major T2D complications: diabetic kidney disease, diabetic retinopathy, diabetic neuropathy, and cardiovascular complications. We discuss advancements in omics research, summarizing findings from genetic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic studies across different ancestries and disease-relevant tissues. We stress the importance of integrating multi-omics techniques to elucidate the biological mechanisms underlying T2D complications and advocate for ancestrally diverse studies. Ultimately, these insights will improve risk prediction for T2D complications and inform translation strategies.
Human diseases with similar phenotypes can be interconnected through shared biological pathways, genes, or molecular mechanisms. Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) cause photoreceptor dysfunction due to mutations in approximately 300 genes, affecting visual transduction, photoreceptor morphogenesis, and transcription factors, suggesting common pathobiological mechanisms. This study examined the functional relationship between known IRDs genes by integrating binding sites and gene expression data from the key photoreceptor transcription factors (TFs), Crx and Nrl. We show that the targets of these TFs were enriched in IRDs causal genes. Co-expression network analysis revealed that IRD-centric networks were disrupted when Crx and Nrl were knocked out. Finally, we identified a highly connected core module comprising 14 IRD and 39 target genes, of which 29 were dysregulated in the rod photoreceptors of the four IRD mouse models. These findings offer a network-based interpretation of IRDs, aiding in the identification of common mechanisms, prioritizing genes for novel disease gene identification, and informing the development of gene-agnostic therapies for IRDs.
Background: Cadmium (Cd), classified as an International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Group 1 human carcinogen, is present in cigarette smoke. Recent studies have illustrated the potential role of genetics in influencing Cd biomarker levels. Methods: We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of urinary Cd levels in 1977 current smokers from the Multiethnic Cohort Study, comprising participants from five different racial and ethnic groups. Linear regression models were adjusted for age at urine collection, sex, self-reported race/ethnicity, and the top ten leading principal components. Results: Among the 11 710 497 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) analyzed, no associations with urinary Cd reached genome-wide significance (P < 5.0 x 10(-8)). Notably, five variants demonstrated suggestive associations with urinary Cd levels (P < 1.0 x 10(-6)). Lead variants included: rs10097646 in the SCARA gene at 8q13.2 (P = 2.62 x 10(-7)); rs7444817 in the NIPBL gene at 5p13.2 (P = 3.10 x 10(-7)), rs830422 in the SPINK4 gene at 9q13.2 (P = 4.89 x 10(-7)); chrX:145489901 in the SLC9A7 gene at Xq121.1 (P = 5.38 x 10(-7)); and rs73074456 at 5p13.3 (P = 5.86 x 10(-7)). Conclusions: Our GWAS of urinary Cd levels in a diverse population of people who smoke, revealed suggestive associations with variants in SCARA5, NIPBL, SPINK4, SLC9A7, and 5p13.3. These findings underscore the potential role of genetic factors in understanding and mitigating the health risks associated with internal dose of carcinogens, particularly in the context of tobacco-related carcinogens.
Objectives: In recent years, the incidence and mortality rates of prostate cancer (PCa) have still not been significantly reduced and the mechanisms of tumor onset and progression are still not fully understood. The pathogenic mechanisms and upstream regulation of UBE2S expression in prostate cancer have not been elucidated. Methods: Here, we performed bioinformatic analysis of public databases to reveal the expression of UBE2S in PCa and its association with Gleason score, tumor staging, biochemical recurrence, and survival. Subsequently, the effect of UBE2S on the proliferation and invasive capacity of PCa cells was explored. Next, miR-152-3p was identified to bind to the 3 '-UTR of UBE2S mRNA and down-regulated in PCa through luciferase reporter assays. Dual immunofluorescence assay and co-immunoprecipitation assays were performed to verify the regulatory role of UBE2S on PTEN. Finally, the molecular mechanism of UBE2S regulation of PCa progression was further confirmed by rescue experiments and in vivo nude mouse subcutaneous transplantation tumor experiments. Results: UBE2S expression was upregulated in PCa and correlated with patient Gleason score, TNM stage, biochemical recurrence, and disease-free survival. miR-152-3p regulated UBE2S expression in PCa by binding to the UBE2S mRNA 3 '-UTR. Mechanistically, UBE2S combines with PTEN and ubiquitinates it, leading to PTEN degradation and ultimately promoting PCa progression via the AKT/mTOR signaling pathway. Conclusions: UBE2S, down-regulated by miR-152-3p, plays an important role in the onset and progression of PCa through the PTEN-mediated Akt/mTOR pathway and may become a new diagnostic marker and therapeutic target for PCa.
The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) is a G protein-coupled receptor expressed at hypothalamic neurons that has an important role in appetite suppression and food intake. Mutations in MC4R are the most common cause of monogenic obesity and can affect multiple signaling pathways including Gs-cAMP, Gq, ERK1/2, beta-arrestin recruitment, internalization and cell surface expression. The melanocortin-2 receptor accessory protein 2 (MRAP2), is a single-pass transmembrane protein that interacts with and regulates signaling by MC4R. Variants in MRAP2 have also been identified in overweight and obese individuals. However, functional studies that have only measured the effect of MRAP2 variants on MC4R-mediated cAMP signaling have produced inconsistent findings and most do not reduce MC4R function. Here we investigated the effect of twelve of these previously reported MRAP2 variants and showed that all variants that have been identified in overweight or obese individuals impair MC4R function. When expressed at equal concentrations, seven MRAP2 variants impaired MC4R-mediated cAMP signaling, while nine variants impaired IP3 signaling. Four mutations in the MRAP2 C-terminus affected internalization. MRAP2 variants had no effect on total or cell surface expression of either the MRAP2 or MC4R proteins. Structural models predicted that MRAP2 interacts with MC4R transmembrane helices 5 and 6, and mutations in two MRAP2 residues in putative contact sites impaired the ability of MRAP2 to facilitate MC4R signaling. In summary, our studies demonstrate that human MRAP2 variants associated with obesity impair multiple MC4R signaling pathways and that both Gs-cAMP and Gq-IP3 pathways should be assessed to determine variant pathogenicity.
Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) is a congenital enteric neuropathic disorder characterized by high heritability (>80%) and polygenic inheritance (>20 genes). The previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified several common variants associated with HSCR and demonstrated increased predictive performance for HSCR risk in Europeans using a genetic risk score, there remains a notable gap in knowledge regarding Chinese populations. We conducted whole exome sequencing in a HSCR case cohort in Chinese. By using the common controls (505 controls from 1KG EAS and 10 588 controls from ChinaMAP), we conducted GWAS for the common variants in the exome and gene-based association for rare variants. We further validated the associated variants and genes in replicated samples and in vitro and vivo experiments. We identified one novel gene PLK5 by GWAS and suggested 45 novel putative genes based the gene-based test. By using genetic variant at RET and PLK5, we constructed a genetic risk score that could identify the individuals with very high genetic risk for HSCR. Compared with patients with zero or one risk allele from the three variants, the risk for HSCR was 36.61 times higher with six alleles. In addition, we delineated a HSCR risk gene landscape that encompasses 57 genes, which explains 88.5% and 54.5% of HSCR in Chinese and European, respectively. In summary, this study improved the understanding of genetic architecture of HSCR and provided a risk prediction approach for HSCR in the Chinese.
Adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction (AEG) is a common and deadly cancer, and an in-depth investigation of its molecular mechanisms of metastasis is crucial for discovering new therapeutic targets. This study explores the role of the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) LINC00115 in AEG metastasis and its underlying mechanisms. Through the analysis of 108 pairs of AEG cancer tissues and matched adjacent tissues, we found a significant upregulation of LINC00115 in AEG tissues, closely associated with TNM staging and lymph node metastasis. Utilizing cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assays, colony formation experiments, wound healing assays, flow cytometry for apoptosis and cell cycle analysis, and Transwell assays, we have confirmed that LINC00115 significantly promotes proliferation, migration, and invasion of AEG cells in vitro. Animal experiments further validate the role of LINC00115 in promoting tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Additionally, our nuclear-cytoplasmic fractionation experiments and RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) reveal that LINC00115, along with its interacting protein KH-Type splicing regulatory protein (KHSRP), predominantly localizes to the cell nucleus. By conducting RNA pull-down assays and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, we have identified a direct interaction between LINC00115 and KHSRP protein and further determined their binding sites through catRAPID and ENCORI databases. This study provides evidence of LINC00115 as a novel biomarker and potential therapeutic target for AEG and offers a fresh perspective on understanding the molecular mechanisms of AEG metastasis.
This study systematically explores the oncogenic role of the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) LINC00115 in endometrial cancer (EC) and reveals its unique mechanism in promoting proliferation, invasion, and metastasis via the JAK/STAT signaling pathway. LINC00115 is significantly upregulated in EC tissues and closely associated with advanced TNM staging and lymph node metastasis. Functional assays showed that knockdown of LINC00115 suppressed EC cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis, while overexpression enhanced these malignant behaviors. In vivo models confirmed that LINC00115 overexpression accelerates tumor growth and metastasis. Our study is the first to identify LINC00115 as a key activator of the JAK/STAT pathway through direct interaction with KH-type Splicing Regulatory Protein (KHSRP), a previously unrecognized mechanism in EC. This finding provides new insights into lncRNA-mediated signaling regulation and highlights LINC00115 as a novel biomarker and promising therapeutic target for EC, offering a theoretical basis for developing targeted therapies.
Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), known as a common ocular disease with genetic heterogeneity, is characterized by progressive optic disc atrophy and visual field defects. This study aimed to assess the contribution of previously reported POAG-associated genes and investigate potential functional variations and genotype-phenotype correlations in a Han Chinese population. DNA from 500 cases and 500 controls was pooled and sequenced using a customized panel of 398 candidate genes. After prioritization, 21 SNPs from 16 genes were genotyped in the first replication cohort (500 cases and 500 controls), and 9 SNPs were genotyped in the second replication cohort (500 cases and 500 controls). Allelic associations and odds ratios were adjusted for age and sex, while linear regression assessed SNP correlations with POAG endophenotypes. Haplotype analysis and linkage disequilibrium were performed using Haploview. In silico prediction tools were used to predict pathogenicity and function. SNPs from MFN2, DGKG, PKHD1, PTPRJ, and LTBP2 were associated with POAG in at least one cohort, and SNPs from EXOC2, PTPRJ, and LTBP2 showed significant correlations with intraocular pressure. Additionally, haplotype analysis revealed a significant association between the EXOC2 TGC haplotype and POAG risk. We validated several candidate genes and identified novel SNPs, providing further insight into the genetic architecture of POAG in the Han Chinese population.
