Kidneys are intricate three-dimensional structures in the body, yet the spatial and molecular principles of kidney health and disease remain inadequately understood. We generated high-quality datasets for 81 samples, including single-cell, single-nuclear, spot-level (Visium) and single-cell resolution (CosMx) spatial-RNA expression and single-nuclear open chromatin, capturing cells from healthy, diabetic and hypertensive diseased human kidneys. Combining these data, we identify cell types and map them to their locations within the tissue. Unbiased deconvolution of the spatial data identifies the following four distinct microenvironments: glomerular, immune, tubule and fibrotic. We describe the complex organization of microenvironments in health and disease and find that the fibrotic microenvironment is able to molecularly classify human kidneys and offers an improved prognosis compared to traditional histopathology. We provide a comprehensive spatially resolved molecular roadmap of the human kidney and the fibrotic process, demonstrating the clinical utility of spatial transcriptomics.
Somatic cells accumulate genomic alterations with age; however, our understanding of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mosaicism remains limited. Here we investigated the genomes of 2,096 clones derived from three cell types across 31 donors, identifying 6,451 mtDNA variants with heteroplasmy levels of greater than or similar to 0.3%. While the majority of these variants were unique to individual clones, suggesting stochastic acquisition with age, 409 variants (6%) were shared across multiple embryonic lineages, indicating their origin from heteroplasmy in fertilized eggs. The mutational spectrum exhibited replication-strand bias, implicating mtDNA replication as a major mutational process. We evaluated the mtDNA mutation rate (5.0 x 10-8 per base pair) and a turnover frequency of 10-20 per year, which are fundamental components shaping the landscape of mtDNA mosaicism over a lifetime. The expansion of mtDNA-truncating mutations toward homoplasmy was substantially suppressed. Our findings provide comprehensive insights into the origins, dynamics and functional consequences of mtDNA mosaicism in human somatic cells.
Humans display remarkable interindividual variation in their immune response to identical challenges. Yet, our understanding of the genetic and epigenetic factors contributing to such variation remains limited. Here we performed in-depth genetic, epigenetic and transcriptional profiling on primary macrophages derived from individuals of European and African ancestry before and after infection with influenza A virus. We show that baseline epigenetic profiles are strongly predictive of the transcriptional response to influenza A virus across individuals. Quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping revealed highly coordinated genetic effects on gene regulation, with many cis-acting genetic variants impacting concomitantly gene expression and multiple epigenetic marks. These data reveal that ancestry-associated differences in the epigenetic landscape can be genetically controlled, even more than gene expression. Lastly, among QTL variants that colocalized with immune-disease loci, only 7% were gene expression QTL, while the remaining genetic variants impact epigenetic marks, stressing the importance of considering molecular phenotypes beyond gene expression in disease-focused studies.
Acquiring a sufficiently powered cohort of control samples matched to a case sample can be time-consuming or, in some cases, impossible. Accordingly, an ability to leverage genetic data from control samples that were already collected elsewhere could dramatically improve power in genetic association studies. Sharing of control samples can pose significant challenges, since most human genetic data are subject to strict sharing regulations. Here, using the properties of singular value decomposition and subsampling algorithm, we developed a method allowing selection of the best-matching controls in an external pool of samples compliant with personal data protection and eliminating the need for genotype sharing. We provide access to a library of 39,472 exome sequencing controls at http://dnascore.net enabling association studies for case cohorts lacking control subjects. Using this approach, control sets can be selected from this online library with a prespecified matching accuracy, ensuring well-calibrated association analysis for both rare and common variants.
Eukaryotic transcription factors (TFs) activate gene expression by recruiting cofactors to promoters. However, the relationships between TFs, promoters and their associated cofactors remain poorly understood. Here we combine GAL4-transactivation assays with comparative CRISPR-Cas9 screens to identify the cofactors used by nine different TFs and core promoters in human cells. Using this dataset, we associate TFs with cofactors, classify cofactors as ubiquitous or specific and discover transcriptional co-dependencies. Through a reductionistic, comparative approach, we demonstrate that TFs do not display discrete mechanisms of activation. Instead, each TF depends on a unique combination of cofactors, which influences distinct steps in transcription. By contrast, the influence of core promoters appears relatively discrete. Different promoter classes are constrained by either initiation or pause-release, which influences their dynamic range and compatibility with cofactors. Overall, our comparative cofactor screens characterize the interplay between TFs, cofactors and core promoters, identifying general principles by which they influence transcription.
Human aging is marked by the emergence of a tapestry of clonal expansions in dividing tissues, particularly evident in blood as clonal hematopoiesis (CH). CH, linked to cancer risk and aging-related phenotypes, often stems from somatic mutations in a set of established genes. However, the majority of clones lack known drivers. Here we infer gene-level positive selection in whole blood exomes from 200,618 individuals in UK Biobank. We identify 17 additional genes, ZBTB33, ZNF318, ZNF234, SPRED2, SH2B3, SRCAP, SIK3, SRSF1, CHEK2, CCDC115, CCL22, BAX, YLPM1, MYD88, MTA2, MAGEC3 and IGLL5, under positive selection at a population level, and validate this selection pattern in 10,837 whole genomes from single-cell-derived hematopoietic colonies. Clones with mutations in these genes grow in frequency and size with age, comparable to classical CH drivers. They correlate with heightened risk of infection, death and hematological malignancy, highlighting the significance of these additional genes in the aging process.
Aspirations for high crop growth and yield, nutritional quality and bioproduction of materials are challenged by climate change and limited adoption of new technologies. Here, we review recent advances in approaches to profile and model gene regulatory activity over developmental and response time in specific cells, which have revealed the basis of variation in plant phenotypes: both redeployment of key regulators to new contexts and their repurposing to control different slates of genes. New synthetic biology tools allow tunable, spatiotemporal regulation of transgenes, while recent gene-editing technologies enable manipulation of the regulation of native genes. Ultimately, understanding how gene circuitry is wired to control form and function across varied plant species, combined with advanced technology to rewire that circuitry, will unlock solutions to our greatest challenges in agriculture, energy and the environment.
Genotype x environment interactions (GxE) have long been recognized as a key mechanism underlying human phenotypic variation. Technological developments over the past 15 years have dramatically expanded our appreciation of the role of GxE in both gene regulation and complex traits. The richness and complexity of these datasets also required parallel efforts to develop robust and sensitive statistical and computational approaches. Although our understanding of the genetic architecture of molecular and complex traits has been maturing, a large proportion of complex trait heritability remains unexplained. Furthermore, there are increasing efforts to characterize the effect of environmental exposure on human health. We therefore review GxE in human gene regulation and complex traits, advocating for a comprehensive approach that jointly considers genetic and environmental factors in human health and disease.
To maximize the impact of precision medicine approaches, it is critical to identify genetic variants underlying disease and to accurately quantify their functional effects. A gene exemplifying the challenge of variant interpretation is the von Hippel-Lindautumor suppressor (VHL). VHL encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates the cellular response to hypoxia. Germline pathogenic variants in VHL predispose patients to tumors including clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and pheochromocytoma, and somatic VHL mutations are frequently observed in sporadic renal cancer. Here we optimize and apply saturation genome editing to assay nearly all possible single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) across VHL's coding sequence. To delineate mechanisms, we quantify mRNA dosage effects and compare functional effects in isogenic cell lines. Function scores for 2,268 VHL SNVs identify a core set of pathogenic alleles driving ccRCC with perfect accuracy, inform differential risk across tumor types and reveal new mechanisms by which variants impact function. These results have immediate utility for classifying VHL variants encountered clinically and illustrate how precise functional measurements can resolve pleiotropic and dosage-dependent genotype-phenotype relationships across complete genes.
X chromosome inactivation (XCI) generates clonal heterogeneity within XX individuals. Combined with sequence variation between human X chromosomes, XCI gives rise to intra-individual clonal diversity, whereby two sets of clones express mutually exclusive sequence variants present on one or the other X chromosome. Here we ask whether such clones merely co-exist or potentially interact with each other to modulate the contribution of X-linked diversity to organismal development. Focusing on X-linked coding variation in the human STAG2 gene, we show that Stag2variant clones contribute to most tissues at the expected frequencies but fail to form lymphocytes in Stag2WTStag2variant mouse models. Unexpectedly, the absence of Stag2variant clones from the lymphoid compartment is due not solely to cell-intrinsic defects but requires continuous competition by Stag2WT clones. These findings show that interactions between epigenetically diverse clones can operate in an XX individual to shape the contribution of X-linked genetic diversity in a cell-type-specific manner.
Telomeres protect chromosome ends from damage and their length is linked with human disease and aging. We developed a joint telomere length metric, combining quantitative PCR and whole-genome sequencing measurements from 462,666 UK Biobank participants. This metric increased SNP heritability, suggesting that it better captures genetic regulation of telomere length. Exome-wide rare-variant and gene-level collapsing association studies identified 64 variants and 30 genes significantly associated with telomere length, including allelic series in ACD and RTEL1. Notably, 16% of these genes are known drivers of clonal hematopoiesis-an age-related somatic mosaicism associated with myeloid cancers and several nonmalignant diseases. Somatic variant analyses revealed gene-specific associations with telomere length, including lengthened telomeres in individuals with large SRSF2-mutant clones, compared with shortened telomeres in individuals with clonal expansions driven by other genes. Collectively, our findings demonstrate the impact of rare variants on telomere length, with larger effects observed among genes also associated with clonal hematopoiesis.
Gene expression is an essential step in the translation of genotypes into phenotypes. However, little is known about the transcriptome architecture and the underlying genetic effects at the species level. Here we generated and analyzed the pan-transcriptome of similar to 1,000 yeast natural isolates across 4,977 core and 1,468 accessory genes. We found that the accessory genome is an underappreciated driver of transcriptome divergence. Global gene expression patterns combined with population structure showed that variation in heritable expression mainly lies within subpopulation-specific signatures, for which accessory genes are overrepresented. Genome-wide association analyses consistently highlighted that accessory genes are associated with proportionally more variants with larger effect sizes, illustrating the critical role of the accessory genome on the transcriptional landscape within and between populations.
Broomcorn millet (Panicum miliaceum L.) is an orphan crop with the potential to improve cereal production and quality, and ensure food security. Here we present the genetic variations, population structure and diversity of a diverse worldwide collection of 516 broomcorn millet genomes. Population analysis indicated that the domesticated broomcorn millet originated from its wild progenitor in China. We then constructed a graph-based pangenome of broomcorn millet based on long-read de novo genome assemblies of 32 representative accessions. Our analysis revealed that the structural variations were highly associated with transposable elements, which influenced gene expression when located in the coding or regulatory regions. We also identified 139 loci associated with 31 key domestication and agronomic traits, including candidate genes and superior haplotypes, such as LG1, for panicle architecture. Thus, the study's findings provide foundational resources for developing genomics-assisted breeding programs in broomcorn millet.
Cauliflower (Brassica oleracea L. var. botrytis) is a distinctive vegetable that supplies a nutrient-rich edible inflorescence meristem for the human diet. However, the genomic bases of its selective breeding have not been studied extensively. Herein, we present a high-quality reference genome assembly C-8 (V2) and a comprehensive genomic variation map consisting of 971 diverse accessions of cauliflower and its relatives. Genomic selection analysis and deep-mined divergences were used to explore a stepwise domestication process for cauliflower that initially evolved from broccoli (Curd-emergence and Curd-improvement), revealing that three MADS-box genes, CAULIFLOWER1 (CAL1), CAL2 and FRUITFULL (FUL2), could have essential roles during curd formation. Genome-wide association studies identified nine loci significantly associated with morphological and biological characters and demonstrated that a zinc-finger protein (BOB06G135460) positively regulates stem height in cauliflower. This study offers valuable genomic resources for better understanding the genetic bases of curd biogenesis and florescent development in crops.
Remote enhancers are thought to interact with their target promoters via physical proximity, yet the importance of this proximity for enhancer function remains unclear. Here we investigate the three-dimensional (3D) conformation of enhancers during mammalian development by generating high-resolution tissue-resolved contact maps for nearly a thousand enhancers with characterized in vivo activities in ten murine embryonic tissues. Sixty-one percent of developmental enhancers bypass their neighboring genes, which are often marked by promoter CpG methylation. The majority of enhancers display tissue-specific 3D conformations, and both enhancer-promoter and enhancer-enhancer interactions are moderately but consistently increased upon enhancer activation in vivo. Less than 14% of enhancer-promoter interactions form stably across tissues; however, these invariant interactions form in the absence of the enhancer and are likely mediated by adjacent CTCF binding. Our results highlight the general importance of enhancer-promoter physical proximity for developmental gene activation in mammals.
Autosomal recessive coding variants are well-known causes of rare disorders. We quantified the contribution of these variants to developmental disorders in a large, ancestrally diverse cohort comprising 29,745 trios, of whom 20.4% had genetically inferred non-European ancestries. The estimated fraction of patients attributable to exome-wide autosomal recessive coding variants ranged from similar to 2-19% across genetically inferred ancestry groups and was significantly correlated with average autozygosity. Established autosomal recessive developmental disorder-associated (ARDD) genes explained 84.0% of the total autosomal recessive coding burden, and 34.4% of the burden in these established genes was explained by variants not already reported as pathogenic in ClinVar. Statistical analyses identified two novel ARDD genes: KBTBD2 and ZDHHC16. This study expands our understanding of the genetic architecture of developmental disorders across diverse genetically inferred ancestry groups and suggests that improving strategies for interpreting missense variants in known ARDD genes may help diagnose more patients than discovering the remaining genes.
Rare genetic variants can have strong effects on phenotypes, yet accounting for rare variants in genetic analyses is statistically challenging due to the limited number of allele carriers and the burden of multiple testing. While rich variant annotations promise to enable well-powered rare variant association tests, methods integrating variant annotations in a data-driven manner are lacking. Here we propose deep rare variant association testing (DeepRVAT), a model based on set neural networks that learns a trait-agnostic gene impairment score from rare variant annotations and phenotypes, enabling both gene discovery and trait prediction. On 34 quantitative and 63 binary traits, using whole-exome-sequencing data from UK Biobank, we find that DeepRVAT yields substantial gains in gene discoveries and improved detection of individuals at high genetic risk. Finally, we demonstrate how DeepRVAT enables calibrated and computationally efficient rare variant tests at biobank scale, aiding the discovery of genetic risk factors for human disease traits.
Drug resistance is a principal limitation to the long-term efficacy of cancer therapies. Cancer genome sequencing can retrospectively delineate the genetic basis of drug resistance, but this requires large numbers of post-treatment samples to nominate causal variants. Here we prospectively identify genetic mechanisms of resistance to ten oncology drugs from CRISPR base editing mutagenesis screens in four cancer cell lines using a guide RNA library predicted to install 32,476 variants in 11 cancer genes. We identify four functional classes of protein variants modulating drug sensitivity and use single-cell transcriptomics to reveal how these variants operate through distinct mechanisms, including eliciting a drug-addicted cell state. We identify variants that can be targeted with alternative inhibitors to overcome resistance and functionally validate an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) variant that sensitizes lung cancer cells to EGFR inhibitors. Our variant-to-function map has implications for patient stratification, therapy combinations and drug scheduling in cancer treatment.
The structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) complexes-cohesin and condensins-are crucial for chromosome separation and compaction during cell division. During the interphase, mammalian cohesins additionally fold the genome into loops and domains. Here we show that, in Caenorhabditis elegans, a species with holocentric chromosomes, condensin I is the primary, long-range loop extruder. The loss of condensin I and its X-specific variant, condensin I-DC, leads to genome-wide decompaction, chromosome mixing and disappearance of X-specific topologically associating domains, while reinforcing fine-scale epigenomic compartments. In addition, condensin I/I-DC inactivation led to the upregulation of X-linked genes and unveiled nuclear bodies grouping together binding sites for the X-targeting loading complex of condensin I-DC. C. elegans condensin I/I-DC thus uniquely organizes holocentric interphase chromosomes, akin to cohesin in mammals, as well as regulates X-chromosome gene expression.
Understanding why we age is a long-standing question, and many mechanistic theories of aging have been proposed. Owing to limitations in studying the aging process, including a lack of adequate quantitative measurements, its mechanistic basis remains a subject of debate. Here, I explore theories of aging from the perspective of causal relationships. Many aging-related changes have been observed and touted as drivers of aging, including molecular changes in the genome, telomeres, mitochondria, epigenome and proteins and cellular changes affecting stem cells, the immune system and senescent cell buildup. Determining which changes are drivers and not passengers of aging remains a challenge, however, and I discuss how animal models and human genetic studies have been used empirically to infer causality. Overall, our understanding of the drivers of human aging is still inadequate; yet with a global aging population, elucidating the causes of aging has the potential to revolutionize biomedical research.
The contrast between the disruption of genome topology after cohesin loss and the lack of downstream gene expression changes instigates intense debates regarding the structure-function relationship between genome and gene regulation. Here, by analyzing transcriptome and chromatin accessibility at the single-cell level, we discover that, instead of dictating population-wide gene expression levels, cohesin supplies a general function to neutralize stochastic coexpression tendencies of cis-linked genes in single cells. Notably, cohesin loss induces widespread gene coactivation and chromatin co-opening tens of million bases apart in cis. Spatial genome and protein imaging reveals that cohesin prevents gene co-bursting along the chromosome and blocks spatial mixing of transcriptional hubs. Single-molecule imaging shows that cohesin confines the exploration of diverse enhancer and core promoter binding transcriptional regulators. Together, these results support that cohesin arranges nuclear topology to control gene coexpression in single cells.
During domestication, early farmers selected different vegetative and reproductive traits, but identifying the causative loci has been hampered by their epistasis and functional redundancy. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing combined with genome-wide association analysis, we uncovered a developmental regulator that controls both types of trait while acting upstream of multiple domestication loci. tasselsheath4 (tsh4) is a new maize domestication gene that establishes developmental boundaries and specifies meristem fates despite not being expressed within them. TSH4 accomplishes this by using a double-negative feedback loop that targets and represses the very same microRNAs that negatively regulate it. TSH4 functions redundantly with a pair of homologs to positively regulate a suite of domestication loci while specifying the meristem that doubled seed yield in modern maize. TSH4 has a critical role in yield gain and helped generate ideal crop plant architecture, thus explaining why it was a major domestication target.
X chromosome inactivation triggers a dramatic reprogramming of transcription and chromosome architecture. However, how the chromatin organization of inactive X chromosome is established de novo in vivo remains elusive. Here, we identified an Xist-separated megadomain structure (X-megadomains) on the inactive X chromosome in mouse extraembryonic lineages and extraembryonic endoderm (XEN) cell lines, and transiently in the embryonic lineages, before Dxz4-delineated megadomain formation at later stages in a strain-specific manner. X-megadomain boundary coincides with strong enhancer activities and cohesin binding in an Xist regulatory region required for proper Xist activation in early embryos. Xist regulatory region disruption or cohesin degradation impaired X-megadomains in extraembryonic endoderm cells and caused ectopic activation of regulatory elements and genes near Xist, indicating that cohesin loading at regulatory elements promotes X-megadomains and confines local gene activities. These data reveal stepwise X chromosome folding and transcriptional regulation to achieve both essential gene activation and global silencing during the early stages of X chromosome inactivation.
Studies have shown that drug targets with human genetic support are more likely to succeed in clinical trials. Hence, a tool integrating genetic evidence to prioritize drug target genes is beneficial for drug discovery. We built a genetic priority score (GPS) by integrating eight genetic features with drug indications from the Open Targets and SIDER databases. The top 0.83%, 0.28% and 0.19% of the GPS conferred a 5.3-, 9.9- and 11.0-fold increased effect of having an indication, respectively. In addition, we observed that targets in the top 0.28% of the score were 1.7-, 3.7- and 8.8-fold more likely to advance from phase I to phases II, III and IV, respectively. Complementary to the GPS, we incorporated the direction of genetic effect and drug mechanism into a directional version of the score called the GPS with direction of effect. We applied our method to 19,365 protein-coding genes and 399 drug indications and made all results available through a web portal.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is a common metabolic disorder affecting more than 16 million pregnancies annually worldwide1,2. GDM is related to an increased lifetime risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D)1-3, with over a third of women developing T2D within 15 years of their GDM diagnosis. The diseases are hypothesized to share a genetic predisposition1-7, but few studies have sought to uncover the genetic underpinnings of GDM. Most studies have evaluated the impact of T2D loci only8-10, and the three prior genome-wide association studies of GDM11-13 have identified only five loci, limiting the power to assess to what extent variants or biological pathways are specific to GDM. We conducted the largest genome-wide association study of GDM to date in 12,332 cases and 131,109 parous female controls in the FinnGen study and identified 13 GDM-associated loci, including nine new loci. Genetic features distinct from T2D were identified both at the locus and genomic scale. Our results suggest that the genetics of GDM risk falls into the following two distinct categories: one part conventional T2D polygenic risk and one part predominantly influencing mechanisms disrupted in pregnancy. Loci with GDM-predominant effects map to genes related to islet cells, central glucose homeostasis, steroidogenesis and placental expression.
Cell-type classification is a crucial step in single-cell sequencing analysis. Various methods have been proposed for transferring a cell-type label from an annotated reference atlas to unannotated query datasets. Existing methods for transferring cell-type labels lack proper uncertainty estimation for the resulting annotations, limiting interpretability and usefulness. To address this, we propose popular Vote (popV), an ensemble of prediction models with an ontology-based voting scheme. PopV achieves accurate cell-type labeling and provides uncertainty scores. In multiple case studies, popV confidently annotates the majority of cells while highlighting cell populations that are challenging to annotate by label transfer. This additional step helps to reduce the load of manual inspection, which is often a necessary component of the annotation process, and enables one to focus on the most problematic parts of the annotation, streamlining the overall annotation process.
Alternative splicing (AS) in human genes is widely viewed as a mechanism for enhancing proteomic diversity. AS can also impact gene expression levels without increasing protein diversity by producing 'unproductive' transcripts that are targeted for rapid degradation by nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). However, the relative importance of this regulatory mechanism remains underexplored. To better understand the impact of AS-NMD relative to other regulatory mechanisms, we analyzed population-scale genomic data across eight molecular assays, covering various stages from transcription to cytoplasmic decay. We report threefold more unproductive splicing compared with prior estimates using steady-state RNA. This unproductive splicing compounds across multi-intronic genes, resulting in 15% of transcript molecules from protein-coding genes being unproductive. Leveraging genetic variation across cell lines, we find that GWAS trait-associated loci explained by AS are as often associated with NMD-induced expression level differences as with differences in protein isoform usage. Our findings suggest that much of the impact of AS is mediated by NMD-induced changes in gene expression rather than diversification of the proteome.
Human pluripotent stem (hPS) cells can, in theory, be differentiated into any cell type, making them a powerful in vitro model for human biology. Recent technological advances have facilitated large-scale hPS cell studies that allow investigation of the genetic regulation of molecular phenotypes and their contribution to high-order phenotypes such as human disease. Integrating hPS cells with single-cell sequencing makes identifying context-dependent genetic effects during cell development or upon experimental manipulation possible. Here we discuss how the intersection of stem cell biology, population genetics and cellular genomics can help resolve the functional consequences of human genetic variation. We examine the critical challenges of integrating these fields and approaches to scaling them cost-effectively and practically. We highlight two areas of human biology that can particularly benefit from population-scale hPS cell studies, elucidating mechanisms underlying complex disease risk loci and evaluating relationships between common genetic variation and pharmacotherapeutic phenotypes.
We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in 327 children with cerebral palsy (CP) and their biological parents. We classified 37 of 327 (11.3%) children as having pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants and 58 of 327 (17.7%) as having variants of uncertain significance. Multiple classes of P/LP variants included single-nucleotide variants (SNVs)/indels (6.7%), copy number variations (3.4%) and mitochondrial mutations (1.5%). The COL4A1 gene had the most P/LP SNVs. We also analyzed two pediatric control cohorts (n = 203 trios and n = 89 sib-pair families) to provide a baseline for de novo mutation rates and genetic burden analyses, the latter of which demonstrated associations between de novo deleterious variants and genes related to the nervous system. An enrichment analysis revealed previously undescribed plausible candidate CP genes (SMOC1, KDM5B, BCL11A and CYP51A1). A multifactorial CP risk profile and substantial presence of P/LP variants combine to support WGS in the diagnostic work-up across all CP and related phenotypes.
Zygnematophyceae are the algal sisters of land plants. Here we sequenced four genomes of filamentous Zygnematophyceae, including chromosome-scale assemblies for three strains of Zygnema circumcarinatum. We inferred traits in the ancestor of Zygnematophyceae and land plants that might have ushered in the conquest of land by plants: expanded genes for signaling cascades, environmental response, and multicellular growth. Zygnematophyceae and land plants share all the major enzymes for cell wall synthesis and remodifications, and gene gains shaped this toolkit. Co-expression network analyses uncover gene cohorts that unite environmental signaling with multicellular developmental programs. Our data shed light on a molecular chassis that balances environmental response and growth modulation across more than 600 million years of streptophyte evolution.
Skin color is highly variable in Africans, yet little is known about the underlying molecular mechanism. Here we applied massively parallel reporter assays to screen 1,157 candidate variants influencing skin pigmentation in Africans and identified 165 single-nucleotide polymorphisms showing differential regulatory activities between alleles. We combine Hi-C, genome editing and melanin assays to identify regulatory elements for MFSD12, HMG20B, OCA2, MITF, LEF1, TRPS1, BLOC1S6 and CYB561A3 that impact melanin levels in vitro and modulate human skin color. We found that independent mutations in an OCA2 enhancer contribute to the evolution of human skin color diversity and detect signals of local adaptation at enhancers of MITF, LEF1 and TRPS1, which may contribute to the light skin color of Khoesan-speaking populations from Southern Africa. Additionally, we identified CYB561A3 as a novel pigmentation regulator that impacts genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and melanogenesis. These results provide insights into the mechanisms underlying human skin color diversity and adaptive evolution.
Despite linkage to chromosome 16q in 1996, the mutation causing spinocerebellar ataxia type 4 (SCA4), a late-onset sensory and cerebellar ataxia, remained unknown. Here, using long-read single-strand whole-genome sequencing (LR-GS), we identified a heterozygous GGC-repeat expansion in a large Utah pedigree encoding polyglycine (polyG) in zinc finger homeobox protein 3 (ZFHX3), also known as AT-binding transcription factor 1 (ATBF1). We queried 6,495 genome sequencing datasets and identified the repeat expansion in seven additional pedigrees. Ultrarare DNA variants near the repeat expansion indicate a common distant founder event in Sweden. Intranuclear ZFHX3-p62-ubiquitin aggregates were abundant in SCA4 basis pontis neurons. In fibroblasts and induced pluripotent stem cells, the GGC expansion led to increased ZFHX3 protein levels and abnormal autophagy, which were normalized with small interfering RNA-mediated ZFHX3 knockdown in both cell types. Improving autophagy points to a therapeutic avenue for this novel polyG disease. The coding GGC-repeat expansion in an extremely G+C-rich region was not detectable by short-read whole-exome sequencing, which demonstrates the power of LR-GS for variant discovery.
Cancers are driven by alterations in diverse genes, creating dependencies that can be therapeutically targeted. However, many genetic dependencies have proven inconsistent across tumors. Here we describe SCHEMATIC, a strategy to identify a core network of highly penetrant, actionable genetic interactions. First, fundamental cellular processes are perturbed by systematic combinatorial knockouts across tumor lineages, identifying 1,805 synthetic lethal interactions (95% unreported). Interactions are then analyzed by hierarchical pooling, revealing that half segregate reliably by tissue type or biomarker status (51%) and a substantial minority are penetrant across lineages (34%). Interactions converge on 49 multigene systems, including MAPK signaling and BAF transcriptional regulatory complexes, which become essential on disruption of polymerases. Some 266 interactions translate to robust biomarkers of drug sensitivity, including frequent genetic alterations in the KDM5C/6A histone demethylases, which sensitize to inhibition of TIPARP (PARP7). SCHEMATIC offers a context-aware, data-driven approach to match genetic alterations to targeted therapies.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive lung disease with poor prognosis and limited treatment options. Efforts to identify effective treatments are thwarted by limited understanding of IPF pathogenesis and poor translatability of available preclinical models. Here we generated spatially resolved transcriptome maps of human IPF (n = 4) and bleomycin-induced mouse pulmonary fibrosis (n = 6) to address these limitations. We uncovered distinct fibrotic niches in the IPF lung, characterized by aberrant alveolar epithelial cells in a microenvironment dominated by transforming growth factor beta signaling alongside predicted regulators, such as TP53 and APOE. We also identified a clear divergence between the arrested alveolar regeneration in the IPF fibrotic niches and the active tissue repair in the acutely fibrotic mouse lung. Our study offers in-depth insights into the IPF transcriptional landscape and proposes alveolar regeneration as a promising therapeutic strategy for IPF.
While genome-wide association studies are increasingly successful in discovering genomic loci associated with complex human traits and disorders, the biological interpretation of these findings remains challenging. Here we developed the GSA-MiXeR analytical tool for gene set analysis (GSA), which fits a model for the heritability of individual genes, accounting for linkage disequilibrium across variants and allowing the quantification of partitioned heritability and fold enrichment for small gene sets. We validated the method using extensive simulations and sensitivity analyses. When applied to a diverse selection of complex traits and disorders, including schizophrenia, GSA-MiXeR prioritizes gene sets with greater biological specificity compared to standard GSA approaches, implicating voltage-gated calcium channel function and dopaminergic signaling for schizophrenia. Such biologically relevant gene sets, often with fewer than ten genes, are more likely to provide insights into the pathobiology of complex diseases and highlight potential drug targets.
We leveraged information from more than 1.2 million participants, including 97,383 cases, to investigate the genetics of anxiety disorders across five continental groups. Through ancestry-specific and cross-ancestry genome-wide association studies, we identified 51 anxiety-associated loci, 39 of which were novel. In addition, polygenic risk scores derived from individuals of European descent were associated with anxiety in African, admixed American and East Asian groups. The heritability of anxiety was enriched for genes expressed in the limbic system, cerebral cortex, cerebellum, metencephalon, entorhinal cortex and brain stem. Transcriptome-wide and proteome-wide analyses highlighted 115 genes associated with anxiety through brain-specific and cross-tissue regulation. Anxiety also showed global and local genetic correlations with depression, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and widespread pleiotropy with several physical health domains. Overall, this study expands our knowledge regarding the genetic risk and pathogenesis of anxiety disorders, highlighting the importance of investigating diverse populations and integrating multi-omics information.
Genome-wide association studies of brain imaging phenotypes are mainly performed in European populations, but other populations are severely under-represented. Here, we conducted Chinese-alone and cross-ancestry genome-wide association studies of 3,414 brain imaging phenotypes in 7,058 Chinese Han and 33,224 white British participants. We identified 38 new associations in Chinese-alone analyses and 486 additional new associations in cross-ancestry meta-analyses at P < 1.46 x 10(-11) for discovery and P < 0.05 for replication. We pooled significant autosomal associations identified by single- or cross-ancestry analyses into 6,443 independent associations, which showed uneven distribution in the genome and the phenotype subgroups. We further divided them into 44 associations with different effect sizes and 3,557 associations with similar effect sizes between ancestries. Loci of these associations were shared with 15 brain-related non-imaging traits including cognition and neuropsychiatric disorders. Our results provide a valuable catalog of genetic associations for brain imaging phenotypes in more diverse populations.
The relationship between genetic variation and gene expression in brain cell types and subtypes remains understudied. Here, we generated single-nucleus RNA sequencing data from the neocortex of 424 individuals of advanced age; we assessed the effect of genetic variants on RNA expression in cis (cis-expression quantitative trait loci) for seven cell types and 64 cell subtypes using 1.5 million transcriptomes. This effort identified 10,004 eGenes at the cell type level and 8,099 eGenes at the cell subtype level. Many eGenes are only detected within cell subtypes. A new variant influences APOE expression only in microglia and is associated with greater cerebral amyloid angiopathy but not Alzheimer's disease pathology, after adjusting for APOE epsilon 4, providing mechanistic insights into both pathologies. Furthermore, only a TMEM106B variant affects the proportion of cell subtypes. Integration of these results with genome-wide association studies highlighted the targeted cell type and probable causal gene within Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, educational attainment and Parkinson's disease loci.
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) interacts with RNA in cells, but there is no consensus on how RNA regulates PRC2 canonical functions, including chromatin modification and the maintenance of transcription programs in lineage-committed cells. We assayed two separation-of-function mutants of the PRC2 catalytic subunit EZH2, defective in RNA binding but functional in methyltransferase activity. We find that part of the RNA-binding surface of EZH2 is required for chromatin modification, yet this activity is independent of RNA. Mechanistically, the RNA-binding surface within EZH2 is required for chromatin modification in vitro and in cells, through interactions with nucleosomal DNA. Contrarily, an RNA-binding-defective mutant exhibited normal chromatin modification activity in vitro and in lineage-committed cells, accompanied by normal gene repression activity. Collectively, we show that part of the RNA-binding surface of EZH2, rather than the RNA-binding activity per se, is required for the histone methylation in vitro and in cells, through interactions with the substrate nucleosome.
Fine-mapping in genome-wide association studies attempts to identify causal SNPs from a set of candidate SNPs in a local genomic region of interest and is commonly performed in one genetic ancestry at a time. Here, we present multi-ancestry sum of the single effects model (MESuSiE), a probabilistic multi-ancestry fine-mapping method, to improve the accuracy and resolution of fine-mapping by leveraging association information across ancestries. MESuSiE uses summary statistics as input, accounts for the diverse linkage disequilibrium pattern observed in different ancestries, explicitly models both shared and ancestry-specific causal SNPs, and relies on a variational inference algorithm for scalable computation. We evaluated the performance of MESuSiE through comprehensive simulations and multi-ancestry fine-mapping of four lipid traits with both European and African samples. In the real data, MESuSiE improves fine-mapping resolution by 19.0% to 72.0% compared to existing approaches, is an order of magnitude faster, and captures and categorizes shared and ancestry-specific causal signals with enhanced functional enrichment.
The emergence of biobank-level datasets offers new opportunities to discover novel biomarkers and develop predictive algorithms for human disease. Here, we present an ensemble machine-learning framework (machine learning with phenotype associations, MILTON) utilizing a range of biomarkers to predict 3,213 diseases in the UK Biobank. Leveraging the UK Biobank's longitudinal health record data, MILTON predicts incident disease cases undiagnosed at time of recruitment, largely outperforming available polygenic risk scores. We further demonstrate the utility of MILTON in augmenting genetic association analyses in a phenome-wide association study of 484,230 genome-sequenced samples, along with 46,327 samples with matched plasma proteomics data. This resulted in improved signals for 88 known (P < 1 x 10(-8)) gene-disease relationships alongside 182 gene-disease relationships that did not achieve genome-wide significance in the nonaugmented baseline cohorts. We validated these discoveries in the FinnGen biobank alongside two orthogonal machine-learning methods built for gene-disease prioritization. All extracted gene-disease associations and incident disease predictive biomarkers are publicly available (http://milton.public.cgr.astrazeneca.com).
Contiguous genome sequence assemblies will help us to realize the full potential of crop translational genomics. Recent advances in sequencing technologies, especially long-read sequencing strategies, have made it possible to construct gapless telomere-to-telomere (T2T) assemblies, thus offering novel insights into genome organization and function. Plant genomes pose unique challenges, such as a continuum of ancient to recent polyploidy and abundant highly similar and long repetitive elements. Owing to progress in sequencing approaches, for most crop plants, chromosome-scale reference genome assemblies are available, but T2T assembly construction remains challenging. Here we describe methods for haplotype-resolved, gapless T2T assembly construction in plants, including various crop species. We outline the impact of T2T assemblies in elucidating the roles of repetitive elements in gene regulation, as well as in pangenomics, functional genomics, genome-assisted breeding and targeted genome manipulation. In conjunction with sequence-enriched germplasm repositories, T2T assemblies thus hold great promise for basic and applied plant sciences.
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS), whole-exome sequencing (WES) and array genotyping with imputation (IMP) are common strategies for assessing genetic variation and its association with medically relevant phenotypes. To date, there has been no systematic empirical assessment of the yield of these approaches when applied to hundreds of thousands of samples to enable the discovery of complex trait genetic signals. Using data for 100 complex traits from 149,195 individuals in the UK Biobank, we systematically compare the relative yield of these strategies in genetic association studies. We find that WGS and WES combined with arrays and imputation (WES + IMP) have the largest association yield. Although WGS results in an approximately fivefold increase in the total number of assayed variants over WES + IMP, the number of detected signals differed by only 1% for both single-variant and gene-based association analyses. Given that WES + IMP typically results in savings of lab and computational time and resources expended per sample, we evaluate the potential benefits of applying WES + IMP to larger samples. When we extend our WES + IMP analyses to 468,169 UK Biobank individuals, we observe an approximately fourfold increase in association signals with the threefold increase in sample size. We conclude that prioritizing WES + IMP and large sample sizes rather than contemporary short-read WGS alternatives will maximize the number of discoveries in genetic association studies.
We report a multi-ancestry genome-wide association study on liver cirrhosis and its associated endophenotypes, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and gamma-glutamyl transferase. Using data from 12 cohorts, including 18,265 cases with cirrhosis, 1,782,047 controls, up to 1 million individuals with liver function tests and a validation cohort of 21,689 cases and 617,729 controls, we identify and validate 14 risk associations for cirrhosis. Many variants are located near genes involved in hepatic lipid metabolism. One of these, PNPLA3 p.Ile148Met, interacts with alcohol intake, obesity and diabetes on the risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We develop a polygenic risk score that associates with the progression from cirrhosis to HCC. By focusing on prioritized genes from common variant analyses, we find that rare coding variants in GPAM associate with lower ALT, supporting GPAM as a potential target for therapeutic inhibition. In conclusion, this study provides insights into the genetic underpinnings of cirrhosis.
How chronic mutational processes and punctuated bursts of DNA damage drive evolution of the cancer genome is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate a strategy to disentangle and quantify distinct mechanisms underlying genome evolution in single cells, during single mitoses and at single-strand resolution. To distinguish between chronic (reactive oxygen species (ROS)) and acute (ultraviolet light (UV)) mutagenesis, we microfluidically separate pairs of sister cells from the first mitosis following burst UV damage. Strikingly, UV mutations manifest as sister-specific events, revealing mirror-image mutation phasing genome-wide. In contrast, ROS mutagenesis in transcribed regions is reduced strand agnostically. Successive rounds of genome replication over persisting UV damage drives multiallelic variation at CC dinucleotides. Finally, we show that mutation phasing can be resolved to single strands across the entire genome of liver tumors from F1 mice. This strategy can be broadly used to distinguish the contributions of overlapping cancer relevant mutational processes.
To effectively reduce vision loss due to age-related macular generation (AMD) on a global scale, knowledge of its genetic architecture in diverse populations is necessary. A critical element, AMD risk profiles in African and Hispanic/Latino ancestries, remains largely unknown. We combined data in the Million Veteran Program with five other cohorts to conduct the first multi-ancestry genome-wide association study of AMD and discovered 63 loci (30 novel). We observe marked cross-ancestry heterogeneity at major risk loci, especially in African-ancestry populations which demonstrate a primary signal in a major histocompatibility complex class II haplotype and reduced risk at the established CFH and ARMS2/HTRA1 loci. Dissecting local ancestry in admixed individuals, we find significantly smaller marginal effect sizes for CFH risk alleles in African ancestry haplotypes. Broadening efforts to include ancestrally distinct populations helped uncover genes and pathways that boost risk in an ancestry-dependent manner and are potential targets for corrective therapies.
Thyrotropin (TSH) is the master regulator of thyroid gland growth and function. Resistance to TSH (RTSH) describes conditions with reduced sensitivity to TSH. Dominantly inherited RTSH has been linked to a locus on chromosome 15q, but its genetic basis has remained elusive. Here we show that non-coding mutations in a (TTTG)(4) short tandem repeat (STR) underlie dominantly inherited RTSH in all 82 affected participants from 12 unrelated families. The STR is contained in a primate-specific Alu retrotransposon with thyroid-specific cis-regulatory chromatin features. Fiber-seq and RNA-seq studies revealed that the mutant STR activates a thyroid-specific enhancer cluster, leading to haplotype-specific upregulation of the bicistronic MIR7-2/MIR1179 locus 35 kb downstream and overexpression of its microRNA products in the participants' thyrocytes. An imbalance in signaling pathways targeted by these micro-RNAs provides a working model for this cause of RTSH. This finding broadens our current knowledge of genetic defects altering pituitary-thyroid feedback regulation.
The functional impact and cellular context of mosaic structural variants (mSVs) in normal tissues is understudied. Utilizing Strand-seq, we sequenced 1,133 single-cell genomes from 19 human donors of increasing age, and discovered the heterogeneous mSV landscapes of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. While mSVs are continuously acquired throughout life, expanded subclones in our cohort are confined to individuals >60. Cells already harboring mSVs are more likely to acquire additional somatic structural variants, including megabase-scale segmental aneuploidies. Capitalizing on comprehensive single-cell micrococcal nuclease digestion with sequencing reference data, we conducted high-resolution cell-typing for eight hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Clonally expanded mSVs disrupt normal cellular function by dysregulating diverse cellular pathways, and enriching for myeloid progenitors. Our findings underscore the contribution of mSVs to the cellular and molecular phenotypes associated with the aging hematopoietic system, and establish a foundation for deciphering the molecular links between mSVs, aging and disease susceptibility in normal tissues.
In mammals, early embryonic development exhibits highly unusual spatial positioning of genomic regions at the nuclear lamina, but the mechanisms underpinning this atypical genome organization remain elusive. Here, we generated single-cell profiles of lamina-associated domains (LADs) coupled with transcriptomics, which revealed a striking overlap between preimplantation-specific LAD dissociation and noncanonical broad domains of H3K27me3. Loss of H3K27me3 resulted in a restoration of canonical LAD profiles, suggesting an antagonistic relationship between lamina association and H3K27me3. Tethering of H3K27me3 to the nuclear periphery showed that the resultant relocalization is partially dependent on the underlying DNA sequence. Collectively, our results suggest that the atypical organization of LADs in early developmental stages is the result of a tug-of-war between intrinsic affinity for the nuclear lamina and H3K27me3, constrained by the available space at the nuclear periphery. This study provides detailed insight into the molecular mechanisms regulating nuclear organization during early mammalian development.
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are chronic cancers characterized by overproduction of mature blood cells. Their causative somatic mutations, for example, JAK2(V617F), are common in the population, yet only a minority of carriers develop MPN. Here we show that the inherited polygenic loci that underlie common hematological traits influence JAK2(V617F) clonal expansion. We identify polygenic risk scores (PGSs) for monocyte count and plateletcrit as new risk factors for JAK2(V617F) positivity. PGSs for several hematological traits influenced the risk of different MPN subtypes, with low PGSs for two platelet traits also showing protective effects in JAK2(V617F) carriers, making them two to three times less likely to have essential thrombocythemia than carriers with high PGSs. We observed that extreme hematological PGSs may contribute to an MPN diagnosis in the absence of somatic driver mutations. Our study showcases how polygenic backgrounds underlying common hematological traits influence both clonal selection on somatic mutations and the subsequent phenotype of cancer.
Unipotent basal and luminal stem cells maintain prostate homeostasis, with an intermediate cell population emerging during prostate inflammation or cancer. However, the identities of basal stem cell and intermediate cell population remain unclear. Here we identified a rare intermediate cell population expressing luminal markers (termed Basal-B) with enhanced organoid formation capacity, and a larger basal population (termed Basal-A). Genetic lineage tracing revealed Basal-B cells represented a transient basal stem cell state during prostate homeostasis and androgen-mediated regeneration. Activated JAK/STAT signaling was identified in Basal-B cells, and its inhibition significantly reduced Basal-B markers expression. Inflammation increased Basal-B-to-luminal cell transdifferentiation, but JAK/STAT inhibition notably attenuated this effect. Pten gene deletion increased Nkx3.1-expressing Basal-B-like cell population and led to neoplasia. In humans, h-Basal-B cells were more prevalent in benign prostate hyperplasia. This study reveals the identities of intermediate Basal-B cells and underscores the role of JAK/STAT signaling in prostate cell fate determination.
Macrophages exhibit remarkable functional plasticity, a requirement for their central role in tissue homeostasis. During chronic inflammation, macrophages acquire sustained inflammatory 'states' that contribute to disease, but there is limited understanding of the regulatory mechanisms that drive their generation. Here we describe a systematic functional genomics approach that combines genome-wide phenotypic screening in primary murine macrophages with transcriptional and cytokine profiling of genetic perturbations in primary human macrophages to uncover regulatory circuits of inflammatory states. This process identifies regulators of five distinct states associated with key features of macrophage function. Among these regulators, loss of the N-6-methyladenosine (m6A) writer components abolishes m6A modification of TNF transcripts, thereby enhancing mRNA stability and TNF production associated with multiple inflammatory pathologies. Thus, phenotypic characterization of primary murine and human macrophages describes the regulatory circuits underlying distinct inflammatory states, revealing post-transcriptional control of TNF mRNA stability as an immunosuppressive mechanism in innate immunity.
Barnacles are the only sessile lineages among crustaceans, and their sessile life begins with the settlement of swimming larvae (cyprids) and the formation of protective shells. These processes are crucial for adaptation to a sessile lifestyle, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. While investigating these mechanisms in the acorn barnacle, Amphibalanus amphitrite, we discovered a new gene, bcs-6, which is involved in the energy metabolism of cyprid settlement and originated from a transposon by acquiring the promoter and cis-regulatory element. Unlike mollusks, the barnacle shell comprises alternate layers of chitin and calcite and requires another new gene, bsf, which generates silk-like fibers that efficiently bind chitin and aggregate calcite in the aquatic environment. Our findings highlight the importance of exploring new genes in unique adaptative scenarios, and the results will provide important insights into gene origin and material development.
Many thousands and, in some cases, millions of individuals from the major crop and livestock species have been genotyped and phenotyped for the purpose of genomic selection. 'Ultimate genotypes', in which the marker allele haplotypes with the most favorable effects on a target trait or traits in the population are combined together in silico, can be constructed from these datasets. Ultimate genotypes display up to six times the performance of the current best individuals in the population, as demonstrated for net profit in dairy cattle (incorporating a range of economic traits), yield in wheat and 100-seed weight in chickpea. However, current breeding strategies that aim to assemble ultimate genotypes through conventional crossing take many generations. As a hypothetical thought piece, here, we contemplate three future pathways for rapidly achieving ultimate genotypes: accelerated recombination with gene editing, direct editing of whole-genome haplotype sequences and synthetic biology.
Oncogenic PIK3CA mutations generate large clones in aging human esophagus. Here we investigate the behavior of Pik3ca mutant clones in the normal esophageal epithelium of transgenic mice. Expression of a heterozygous Pik3ca(H1047R) mutation drives clonal expansion by tilting cell fate toward proliferation. CRISPR screening and inhibitor treatment of primary esophageal keratinocytes confirmed the PI3K-mTOR pathway increased mutant cell competitive fitness. The antidiabetic drug metformin reduced mutant cell advantage in vivo and in vitro. Conversely, metabolic conditions such as type 1 diabetes or diet-induced obesity enhanced the competitive fitness of Pik3ca(H1047R) cells. Consistently, we found a higher density of PIK3CA gain-of-function mutations in the esophagus of individuals with high body mass index compared with those with normal weight. We conclude that the metabolic environment selectively influences the evolution of the normal epithelial mutational landscape. Clinically feasible interventions to even out signaling imbalances between wild-type and mutant cells may limit the expansion of oncogenic mutants in normal tissues.
Aging epithelia are colonized by somatic mutations, which are subjected to selection influenced by intrinsic and extrinsic factors. The lack of suitable culture systems has slowed the study of this and other long-term biological processes. Here, we describe epithelioids, a facile, cost-effective method of culturing multiple mouse and human epithelia. Esophageal epithelioids self-maintain without passaging for at least 1 year, maintaining a three-dimensional structure with proliferative basal cells that differentiate into suprabasal cells, which eventually shed and retain genomic stability. Live imaging over 5 months showed that epithelioids replicate in vivo cell dynamics. Epithelioids support genetic manipulation and enable the study of mutant cell competition and selection in three-dimensional epithelia, and show how anti-cancer treatments modulate competition between transformed and wild-type cells. Finally, a targeted CRISPR-Cas9 screen shows that epithelioids recapitulate mutant gene selection in aging human esophagus and identifies additional drivers of clonal expansion, resolving the genetic networks underpinning competitive fitness.
Despite substantial progress, causal variants are identified only for a minority of familial Parkinson's disease (PD) cases, leaving high-risk pathogenic variants unidentified(1,2). To identify such variants, we uniformly processed exome sequencing data of 2,184 index familial PD cases and 69,775 controls. Exome-wide analyses converged on RAB32 as a novel PD gene identifying c.213C > G/p.S71R as a high-risk variant presenting in similar to 0.7% of familial PD cases while observed in only 0.004% of controls (odds ratio of 65.5). This variant was confirmed in all cases via Sanger sequencing and segregated with PD in three families. RAB32 encodes a small GTPase known to interact with LRRK2 (refs. 3,4 ). Functional analyses showed that RAB32 S71R increases LRRK2 kinase activity, as indicated by increased autophosphorylation of LRRK2 S1292. Here our results implicate mutant RAB32 in a key pathological mechanism in PD-LRRK2 kinase activity(5-7) -and thus provide novel insights into the mechanistic connections between RAB family biology, LRRK2 and PD risk.
Polygenic scores (PGS) have emerged as the tool of choice for genomic prediction in a wide range of fields. We show that PGS performance varies broadly across contexts and biobanks. Contexts such as age, sex and income can impact PGS accuracy with similar magnitudes as genetic ancestry. Here we introduce an approach (CalPred) that models all contexts jointly to produce prediction intervals that vary across contexts to achieve calibration (include the trait with 90% probability), whereas existing methods are miscalibrated. In analyses of 72 traits across large and diverse biobanks (All of Us and UK Biobank), we find that prediction intervals required adjustment by up to 80% for quantitative traits. For disease traits, PGS-based predictions were miscalibrated across socioeconomic contexts such as annual household income levels, further highlighting the need of accounting for context information in PGS-based prediction across diverse populations.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is a complex disease with remarkable immune and metabolic heterogeneity. Here we perform genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic and spatial transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses on 100 patients with ccRCC from the Tongji Hospital RCC (TJ-RCC) cohort. Our analysis identifies four ccRCC subtypes including De-clear cell differentiated (DCCD)-ccRCC, a subtype with distinctive metabolic features. DCCD cancer cells are characterized by fewer lipid droplets, reduced metabolic activity, enhanced nutrient uptake capability and a high proliferation rate, leading to poor prognosis. Using single-cell and spatial trajectory analysis, we demonstrate that DCCD is a common mode of ccRCC progression. Even among stage I patients, DCCD is associated with worse outcomes and higher recurrence rate, suggesting that it cannot be cured by nephrectomy alone. Our study also suggests a treatment strategy based on subtype-specific immune cell infiltration that could guide the clinical management of ccRCC. Multi-omic analysis of 100 clear cell renal cell carcinomas identifies four transcriptomic subgroups (IM1-IM4). IM4 is a high-risk subtype characterized by specific metabolic changes and a loss of lipid droplets.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is a complex disease with remarkable immune and metabolic heterogeneity. Here we perform genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic and spatial transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses on 100 patients with ccRCC from the Tongji Hospital RCC (TJ-RCC) cohort. Our analysis identifies four ccRCC subtypes including De-clear cell differentiated (DCCD)-ccRCC, a subtype with distinctive metabolic features. DCCD cancer cells are characterized by fewer lipid droplets, reduced metabolic activity, enhanced nutrient uptake capability and a high proliferation rate, leading to poor prognosis. Using single-cell and spatial trajectory analysis, we demonstrate that DCCD is a common mode of ccRCC progression. Even among stage I patients, DCCD is associated with worse outcomes and higher recurrence rate, suggesting that it cannot be cured by nephrectomy alone. Our study also suggests a treatment strategy based on subtype-specific immune cell infiltration that could guide the clinical management of ccRCC.
Endometrial carcinoma remains a public health concern with a growing incidence, particularly in younger women. Preserving fertility is a crucial consideration in the management of early-onset endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEEC), particularly in patients under 40 who maintain both reproductive desire and capacity. To illuminate the molecular characteristics of EEEC, we undertook a large-scale multi-omics study of 215 patients with endometrial carcinoma, including 81 with EEEC. We reveal an unexpected association between exposome-related mutational signature and EEEC, characterized by specific CTNNB1 and SIGLEC10 hotspot mutations and disruption of downstream pathways. Interestingly, SIGLEC10Q144K mutation in EEECs resulted in aberrant SIGLEC-10 protein expression and promoted progestin resistance by interacting with estrogen receptor alpha. We also identified potential protein biomarkers for progestin response in fertility-sparing treatment for EEEC. Collectively, our study establishes a proteogenomic resource of EEECs, uncovering the interactions between exposome and genomic susceptibilities that contribute to the development of primary prevention and early detection strategies for EEECs.
Assembly of complete genomes can reveal functional genetic elements missing from draft sequences. Here we present the near-complete telomere-to-telomere and contiguous genome of the cotton species Gossypium raimondii. Our assembly identified gaps and misoriented or misassembled regions in previous assemblies and produced 13 centromeres, with 25 chromosomal ends having telomeres. In contrast to satellite-rich Arabidopsis and rice centromeres, cotton centromeres lack phased CENH3 nucleosome positioning patterns and probably evolved by invasion from long terminal repeat retrotransposons. In-depth expression profiling of transposable elements revealed a previously unannotated DNA transposon (MuTC01) that interacts with miR2947 to produce trans-acting small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), one of which targets the newly evolved LEC2 (LEC2b) to produce phased siRNAs. Systematic genome editing experiments revealed that this tripartite module, miR2947-MuTC01-LEC2b, controls the morphogenesis of complex folded embryos characteristic of Gossypium and its close relatives in the cotton tribe. Our study reveals a trans-acting siRNA-based tripartite regulatory pathway for embryo development in higher plants.
Functional studies of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been hindered by the lack of methods to assess their evolution. Here we present lncRNA Homology Explorer (lncHOME), a computational pipeline that identifies a unique class of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) with conserved genomic locations and patterns of RNA-binding protein (RBP) binding sites (coPARSE-lncRNAs). Remarkably, several hundred human coPARSE-lncRNAs can be evolutionarily traced to zebrafish. Using CRISPR-Cas12a knockout and rescue assays, we found that knocking out many human coPARSE-lncRNAs led to cell proliferation defects, which were subsequently rescued by predicted zebrafish homologs. Knocking down coPARSE-lncRNAs in zebrafish embryos caused severe developmental delays that were rescued by human homologs. Furthermore, we verified that human, mouse and zebrafish coPARSE-lncRNA homologs tend to bind similar RBPs with their conserved functions relying on specific RBP-binding sites. Overall, our study demonstrates a comprehensive approach for studying the functional conservation of lncRNAs and implicates numerous lncRNAs in regulating vertebrate physiology.
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) genome-wide association studies (GWASs) often overlook rare variants as a result of previous imputation panels' limitations and scarce whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data. We used TOPMed imputation and WGS to conduct the largest T2D GWAS meta-analysis involving 51,256 cases of T2D and 370,487 controls, targeting variants with a minor allele frequency as low as 5 x 10-5. We identified 12 new variants, including a rare African/African American-enriched enhancer variant near the LEP gene (rs147287548), associated with fourfold increased T2D risk. We also identified a rare missense variant in HNF4A (p.Arg114Trp), associated with eightfold increased T2D risk, previously reported in maturity-onset diabetes of the young with reduced penetrance, but observed here in a T2D GWAS. We further leveraged these data to analyze 1,634 ClinVar variants in 22 genes related to monogenic diabetes, identifying two additional rare variants in HNF1A and GCK associated with fivefold and eightfold increased T2D risk, respectively, the effects of which were modified by the individual's polygenic risk score. For 21% of the variants with conflicting interpretations or uncertain significance in ClinVar, we provided support of being benign based on their lack of association with T2D. Our work provides a framework for using rare variant GWASs to identify large-effect variants and assess variant pathogenicity in monogenic diabetes genes.
Copy number variants (CNVs) are among the largest genetic variants, yet CNVs have not been effectively ascertained in most genetic association studies. Here we ascertained protein-altering CNVs from UK Biobank whole-exome sequencing data (n = 468,570) using haplotype-informed methods capable of detecting subexonic CNVs and variation within segmental duplications. Incorporating CNVs into analyses of rare variants predicted to cause gene loss of function (LOF) identified 100 associations of predicted LOF variants with 41 quantitative traits. A low-frequency partial deletion of RGL3 exon 6 conferred one of the strongest protective effects of gene LOF on hypertension risk (odds ratio = 0.86 (0.82-0.90)). Protein-coding variation in rapidly evolving gene families within segmental duplications-previously invisible to most analysis methods-generated some of the human genome's largest contributions to variation in type 2 diabetes risk, chronotype and blood cell traits. These results illustrate the potential for new genetic insights from genomic variation that has escaped large-scale analysis to date.
Although promoters and their enhancers are frequently contained within a topologically associating domain (TAD), some developmentally important genes have their promoter and enhancers within different TADs. Hypotheses about molecular mechanisms enabling cross-TAD interactions remain to be assessed. To test these hypotheses, we used optical reconstruction of chromatin architecture to characterize the conformations of the Pitx1 locus on single chromosomes in developing mouse limbs. Our data support a model in which neighboring boundaries are stacked as a result of loop extrusion, bringing boundary-proximal cis-elements into contact. This stacking interaction also contributes to the appearance of architectural stripes in the population average maps. Through molecular dynamics simulations, we found that increasing boundary strengths facilitates the formation of the stacked boundary conformation, counter-intuitively facilitating border bypass. This work provides a revised view of the TAD borders' function, both facilitating and preventing cis-regulatory interactions, and introduces a framework to distinguish border-crossing from border-respecting enhancer-promoter pairs.
Chromatin accessibility is a hallmark of active regulatory regions and is functionally linked to transcriptional networks and cell identity. However, the molecular mechanisms and networks that govern chromatin accessibility have not been thoroughly studied. Here we conducted a genome-wide CRISPR screening combined with an optimized ATAC-see protocol to identify genes that modulate global chromatin accessibility. In addition to known chromatin regulators like CREBBP and EP400, we discovered a number of previously unrecognized proteins that modulate chromatin accessibility, including TFDP1, HNRNPU, EIF3D and THAP11 belonging to diverse biological pathways. ATAC-seq analysis upon their knockouts revealed their distinct and specific effects on chromatin accessibility. Remarkably, we found that TFDP1, a transcription factor, modulates global chromatin accessibility through transcriptional regulation of canonical histones. In addition, our findings highlight the manipulation of chromatin accessibility as an approach to enhance various cell engineering applications, including genome editing and induced pluripotent stem cell reprogramming.
Catalytic activity of the imitation switch (ISWI) family of remodelers is critical for nucleosomal organization and DNA binding of certain transcription factors, including the insulator protein CTCF. Here we define the contribution of individual subcomplexes by deriving a panel of isogenic mouse stem cell lines, each lacking one of six ISWI accessory subunits. Individual deletions of subunits of either CERF, RSF, ACF, WICH or NoRC subcomplexes only moderately affect the chromatin landscape, while removal of the NURF-specific subunit BPTF leads to a strong reduction in chromatin accessibility and SNF2H ATPase localization around CTCF sites. This affects adjacent nucleosome occupancy and CTCF binding. At a group of sites with reduced chromatin accessibility, CTCF binding persists but cohesin occupancy is reduced, resulting in decreased insulation. These results suggest that CTCF binding can be separated from its function as an insulator in nuclear organization and identify a specific role for NURF in mediating SNF2H localization and chromatin opening at bound CTCF sites.
Discovery of cancer risk variants in the sequence of the germline genome can shed light on carcinogenesis. Here we describe gene burden association analyses, aggregating rare missense and loss of function variants, at 22 cancer sites, including 130,991 cancer cases and 733,486 controls from Iceland, Norway and the United Kingdom. We identified four genes associated with increased cancer risk; the pro-apoptotic BIK for prostate cancer, the autophagy involved ATG12 for colorectal cancer, TG for thyroid cancer and CMTR2 for both lung cancer and cutaneous melanoma. Further, we found genes with rare variants that associate with decreased risk of cancer; AURKB for any cancer, irrespective of site, and PPP1R15A for breast cancer, suggesting that inhibition of PPP1R15A may be a preventive strategy for breast cancer. Our findings pinpoint several new cancer risk genes and emphasize autophagy, apoptosis and cell stress response as a focus point for developing new therapeutics.
GC-rich tandem repeat expansions (TREs) are often associated with DNA methylation, gene silencing and folate-sensitive fragile sites, and underlie several congenital and late-onset disorders. Through a combination of DNA-methylation profiling and tandem repeat genotyping, we identified 24 methylated TREs and investigated their effects on human traits using phenome-wide association studies in 168,641 individuals from the UK Biobank, identifying 156 significant TRE-trait associations involving 17 different TREs. Of these, a GCC expansion in the promoter of AFF3 was associated with a 2.4-fold reduced probability of completing secondary education, an effect size comparable to several recurrent pathogenic microdeletions. In a cohort of 6,371 probands with neurodevelopmental problems of suspected genetic etiology, we observed a significant enrichment of AFF3 expansions compared with controls. With a population prevalence that is at least fivefold higher than the TRE that causes fragile X syndrome, AFF3 expansions represent a major cause of neurodevelopmental delay.
GC-rich tandem repeat expansions (TREs) are often associated with DNA methylation, gene silencing and folate-sensitive fragile sites, and underlie several congenital and late-onset disorders. Through a combination of DNA-methylation profiling and tandem repeat genotyping, we identified 24 methylated TREs and investigated their effects on human traits using phenome-wide association studies in 168,641 individuals from the UK Biobank, identifying 156 significant TRE-trait associations involving 17 different TREs. Of these, a GCC expansion in the promoter of AFF3 was associated with a 2.4-fold reduced probability of completing secondary education, an effect size comparable to several recurrent pathogenic microdeletions. In a cohort of 6,371 probands with neurodevelopmental problems of suspected genetic etiology, we observed a significant enrichment of AFF3 expansions compared with controls. With a population prevalence that is at least fivefold higher than the TRE that causes fragile X syndrome, AFF3 expansions represent a major cause of neurodevelopmental delay.
The transcription factor MYC is overexpressed in most cancers, where it drives multiple hallmarks of cancer progression. MYC is known to promote oncogenic transcription by binding to active promoters. In addition, MYC has also been shown to invade distal enhancers when expressed at oncogenic levels, but this enhancer binding has been proposed to have low gene-regulatory potential. Here, we demonstrate that MYC directly regulates enhancer activity to promote cancer type-specific gene programs predictive of poor patient prognosis. MYC induces transcription of enhancer RNA through recruitment of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), rather than regulating RNAPII pause-release, as is the case at promoters. This process is mediated by MYC-induced H3K9 demethylation and acetylation by GCN5, leading to enhancer-specific BRD4 recruitment through its bromodomains, which facilitates RNAPII recruitment. We propose that MYC drives prognostic cancer type-specific gene programs through induction of an enhancer-specific epigenetic switch, which can be targeted by BET and GCN5 inhibitors.
Inhibiting epigenetic modulators can transcriptionally reactivate transposable elements (TEs). These TE transcripts often generate unique peptides that can serve as immunogenic antigens for immunotherapy. Here, we ask whether TEs activated by epigenetic therapy could appreciably increase the antigen repertoire in glioblastoma, an aggressive brain cancer with low mutation and neoantigen burden. We treated patient-derived primary glioblastoma stem cell lines, an astrocyte cell line and primary fibroblast cell lines with epigenetic drugs, and identified treatment-induced, TE-derived transcripts that are preferentially expressed in cancer cells. We verified that these transcripts could produce human leukocyte antigen class I-presented antigens using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry pulldown experiments. Importantly, many TEs were also transcribed, even in proliferating nontumor cell lines, after epigenetic therapy, which suggests that targeted strategies like CRISPR-mediated activation could minimize potential side effects of activating unwanted genomic regions. The results highlight both the need for caution and the promise of future translational efforts in harnessing treatment-induced TE-derived antigens for targeted immunotherapy.
Haplotype-level allelic characterization facilitates research on the functional, evolutionary and breeding-related features of extremely large and complex plant genomes. We report a 21.7-Gb chromosome-level haplotype-resolved assembly in Pinus densiflora. We found genome rearrangements involving translocations and inversions between chromosomes 1 and 3 of Pinus species and a proliferation of specific long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons (LTR-RTs) in P. densiflora. Evolutionary analyses illustrated that tandem and LTR-RT-mediated duplications led to an increment of transcription factor (TF) genes in P. densiflora. The haplotype sequence comparison showed allelic imbalances, including presence-absence variations of genes (PAV genes) and their functional contributions to flowering and abiotic stress-related traits in P. densiflora. Allele-aware resequencing analysis revealed PAV gene diversity across P. densiflora accessions. Our study provides insights into key mechanisms underlying the evolution of genome structure, LTR-RTs and TFs within the Pinus lineage as well as allelic imbalances and diversity across P. densiflora.
Men of African descent have the highest prostate cancer incidence and mortality rates, yet the genetic basis of prostate cancer in African men has been understudied. We used genomic data from 3,963 cases and 3,509 controls from Ghana, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Uganda to infer ancestry-specific genetic architectures and fine-map disease associations. Fifteen independent associations at 8q24.21, 6q22.1 and 11q13.3 reached genome-wide significance, including four new associations. Intriguingly, multiple lead associations are private alleles, a pattern arising from recent mutations and the out-of-Africa bottleneck. These African-specific alleles contribute to haplotypes with odds ratios above 2.4. We found that the genetic architecture of prostate cancer differs across Africa, with effect size differences contributing more to this heterogeneity than allele frequency differences. Population genetic analyses reveal that African prostate cancer associations are largely governed by neutral evolution. Collectively, our findings emphasize the utility of conducting genetic studies that use diverse populations.
We performed genome-wide association studies of breast cancer including 18,034 cases and 22,104 controls of African ancestry. Genetic variants at 12 loci were associated with breast cancer risk (P < 5 x 10(-8)), including associations of a low-frequency missense variant rs61751053 in ARHGEF38 with overall breast cancer (odds ratio (OR) = 1.48) and a common variant rs76664032 at chromosome 2q14.2 with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) (OR = 1.30). Approximately 15.4% of cases with TNBC carried six risk alleles in three genome-wide association study-identified TNBC risk variants, with an OR of 4.21 (95% confidence interval = 2.66-7.03) compared with those carrying fewer than two risk alleles. A polygenic risk score (PRS) showed an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.60 for the prediction of breast cancer risk, which outperformed PRS derived using data from females of European ancestry. Our study markedly increases the population diversity in genetic studies for breast cancer and demonstrates the utility of PRS for risk prediction in females of African ancestry.
Mutational signature analysis is a recent computational approach for interpreting somatic mutations in the genome. Its application to cancer data has enhanced our understanding of mutational forces driving tumorigenesis and demonstrated its potential to inform prognosis and treatment decisions. However, methodological challenges remain for discovering new signatures and assigning proper weights to existing signatures, thereby hindering broader clinical applications. Here we present Mutational Signature Calculator (MuSiCal), a rigorous analytical framework with algorithms that solve major problems in the standard workflow. Our simulation studies demonstrate that MuSiCal outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms for both signature discovery and assignment. By reanalyzing more than 2,700 cancer genomes, we provide an improved catalog of signatures and their assignments, discover nine indel signatures absent in the current catalog, resolve long-standing issues with the ambiguous 'flat' signatures and give insights into signatures with unknown etiologies. We expect MuSiCal and the improved catalog to be a step towards establishing best practices for mutational signature analysis.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heart muscle disease that represents an important cause of morbidity and mortality, yet causal mechanisms remain largely elusive. Here, we perform a large-scale genome-wide association study and multitrait analysis for DCM using 9,365 cases and 946,368 controls. We identify 70 genome-wide significant loci, which show broad replication in independent samples and map to 63 prioritized genes. Tissue, cell type and pathway enrichment analyses highlight the central role of the cardiomyocyte and contractile apparatus in DCM pathogenesis. Polygenic risk scores constructed from our genome-wide association study predict DCM across different ancestry groups, show differing contributions to DCM depending on rare pathogenic variant status and associate with systolic heart failure across various clinical settings. Mendelian randomization analyses reveal actionable potential causes of DCM, including higher bodyweight and higher systolic blood pressure. Our findings provide insights into the genetic architecture and mechanisms underlying DCM and myocardial function more broadly.
Large-scale sequencing has enabled unparalleled opportunities to investigate the role of rare coding variation in human phenotypic variability. Here, we present a pan-ancestry analysis of sequencing data from three large biobanks, including the All of Us research program. Using mixed-effects models, we performed gene-based rare variant testing for 601 diseases across 748,879 individuals, including 155,236 with ancestry dissimilar to European. We identified 363 significant associations, which highlighted core genes for the human disease phenome and identified potential novel associations, including UBR3 for cardiometabolic disease and YLPM1 for psychiatric disease. Pan-ancestry burden testing represented an inclusive and useful approach for discovery in diverse datasets, although we also highlight the importance of ancestry-specific sensitivity analyses in this setting. Finally, we found that effect sizes for rare protein-disrupting variants were concordant between samples similar to European ancestry and other genetic ancestries (beta Deming = 0.7-1.0). Our results have implications for multi-ancestry and cross-biobank approaches in sequencing association studies for human disease.
Genetic discrimination is an evolving phenomenon that impacts fundamental human rights such as dignity, justice and equity. Although, in the past, various definitions to better conceptualize genetic discrimination have been proposed, these have been unable to capture several key facets of the phenomenon. In this Perspective, we explore definitions of genetic discrimination across disciplines, consider criticisms of such definitions and show how other forms of discrimination and stigmatization can compound genetic discrimination in a way that affects individuals, groups and systems. We propose a nuanced and inclusive definition of genetic discrimination, which reflects its multifaceted impact that should remain relevant in the face of an evolving social context and advancing science. We argue that our definition should be adopted as a guiding academic framework to facilitate scientific and policy discussions about genetic discrimination and support the development of laws and industry policies seeking to address the phenomenon.
Retrotransposons comprise about 45% of the human genome(1), but their contributions to human trait variation and evolution are only beginning to be explored(2,3). Here, we find that a sequence of SVA retrotransposon insertions in an early intron of the ASIP (agouti signaling protein) gene has probably shaped human pigmentation several times. In the UK Biobank (n = 169,641), a recent 3.3-kb SVA insertion polymorphism associated strongly with lighter skin pigmentation (0.22 [0.21-0.23] s.d.; P = 2.8 x 10(-351)) and increased skin cancer risk (odds ratio = 1.23 [1.18-1.27]; P = 1.3 x 10(-28)), appearing to underlie one of the strongest common genetic influences on these phenotypes within European populations(4-6). ASIP expression in skin displayed the same association pattern, with the SVA insertion allele exhibiting 2.2-fold (1.9-2.6) increased expression. This effect had an unusual apparent mechanism: an earlier, nonpolymorphic, human-specific SVA retrotransposon 3.9 kb upstream appeared to have caused ASIP hypofunction by nonproductive splicing, which the new (polymorphic) SVA insertion largely eliminated. Extended haplotype homozygosity indicated that the insertion allele has risen to allele frequencies up to 11% in European populations over the past several thousand years. These results indicate that a sequence of retrotransposon insertions contributed to a species-wide increase, then a local decrease, of human pigmentation.
Mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient cancer evolves through the stepwise erosion of coding homopolymers in target genes. Curiously, the MMR genes MutS homolog 6 (MSH6) and MutS homolog 3 (MSH3) also contain coding homopolymers, and these are frequent mutational targets in MMR-deficient cancers. The impact of incremental MMR mutations on MMR-deficient cancer evolution is unknown. Here we show that microsatellite instability modulates DNA repair by toggling hypermutable mononucleotide homopolymer runs in MSH6 and MSH3 through stochastic frameshift switching. Spontaneous mutation and reversion modulate subclonal mutation rate, mutation bias and HLA and neoantigen diversity. Patient-derived organoids corroborate these observations and show that MMR homopolymer sequences drift back into reading frame in the absence of immune selection, suggesting a fitness cost of elevated mutation rates. Combined experimental and simulation studies demonstrate that subclonal immune selection favors incremental MMR mutations. Overall, our data demonstrate that MMR-deficient colorectal cancers fuel intratumor heterogeneity by adapting subclonal mutation rate and diversity to immune selection.
Hypertension affects more than one billion people worldwide. Here we identify 113 novel loci, reporting a total of 2,103 independent genetic signals (P < 5 x 10(-8)) from the largest single-stage blood pressure (BP) genome-wide association study to date (n = 1,028,980 European individuals). These associations explain more than 60% of single nucleotide polymorphism-based BP heritability. Comparing top versus bottom deciles of polygenic risk scores (PRSs) reveals clinically meaningful differences in BP (16.9 mmHg systolic BP, 95% CI, 15.5-18.2 mmHg, P = 2.22 x 10(-126)) and more than a sevenfold higher odds of hypertension risk (odds ratio, 7.33; 95% CI, 5.54-9.70; P = 4.13 x 10(-44)) in an independent dataset. Adding PRS into hypertension-prediction models increased the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) from 0.791 (95% CI, 0.781-0.801) to 0.826 (95% CI, 0.817-0.836,.AUROC, 0.035, P = 1.98 x 10(-34)). We compare the 2,103 loci results in non-European ancestries and show significant PRS associations in a large African-American sample. Secondary analyses implicate 500 genes previously unreported for BP. Our study highlights the role of increasingly large genomic studies for precision health research.
Pubertal timing varies considerably and is associated with later health outcomes. We performed multi-ancestry genetic analyses on similar to 800,000 women, identifying 1,080 signals for age at menarche. Collectively, these explained 11% of trait variance in an independent sample. Women at the top and bottom 1% of polygenic risk exhibited similar to 11 and similar to 14-fold higher risks of delayed and precocious puberty, respectively. We identified several genes harboring rare loss-of-function variants in similar to 200,000 women, including variants in ZNF483, which abolished the impact of polygenic risk. Variant-to-gene mapping approaches and mouse gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron RNA sequencing implicated 665 genes, including an uncharacterized G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR83, which amplified the signaling of MC3R, a key nutritional sensor. Shared signals with menopause timing at genes involved in DNA damage response suggest that the ovarian reserve might signal centrally to trigger puberty. We also highlight body size-dependent and independent mechanisms that potentially link reproductive timing to later life disease.
Although the spatial, cellular and molecular landscapes of resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are well documented, the characteristics of its metastatic ecology remain elusive. By applying spatially resolved transcriptomics to matched primary and metastatic PDAC samples, we discovered a conserved continuum of fibrotic, metabolic and immunosuppressive spatial ecotypes across anatomical regions. We observed spatial tumor microenvironment heterogeneity spanning beyond that previously appreciated in PDAC. Through comparative analysis, we show that the spatial ecotypes exhibit distinct enrichment between primary and metastatic sites, implying adaptability to the local environment for survival and progression. The invasive border ecotype exhibits both pro-tumorigenic and anti-tumorigenic cell-type enrichment, suggesting a potential immunotherapy target. The ecotype heterogeneity across patients emphasizes the need to map individual patient landscapes to develop personalized treatment strategies. Collectively, our findings provide critical insights into metastatic PDAC biology and serve as a valuable resource for future therapeutic exploration and molecular investigations.
Organisms maintain metabolic homeostasis through the combined functions of small-molecule transporters and enzymes. While many metabolic components have been well established, a substantial number remains without identified physiological substrates. To bridge this gap, we have leveraged large-scale plasma metabolome genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to develop a multiomic Gene-Metabolite Association Prediction (GeneMAP) discovery platform. GeneMAP can generate accurate predictions and even pinpoint genes that are distant from the variants implicated by GWAS. In particular, our analysis identified solute carrier family 25 member 48 (SLC25A48) as a genetic determinant of plasma choline levels. Mechanistically, SLC25A48 loss strongly impairs mitochondrial choline import and synthesis of its downstream metabolite betaine. Integrative rare variant and polygenic score analyses in UK Biobank provide strong evidence that the SLC25A48 causal effects on human disease may in part be mediated by the effects of choline. Altogether, our study provides a discovery platform for metabolic gene function and proposes SLC25A48 as a mitochondrial choline transporter.
Chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.)-an important legume crop cultivated in arid and semiarid regions-has limited genetic diversity. Efforts are being undertaken to broaden its diversity by utilizing its wild relatives, which remain largely unexplored. Here, we present the Cicer super-pangenome based on the de novo genome assemblies of eight annual Cicer wild species. We identified 24,827 gene families, including 14,748 core, 2,958 softcore, 6,212 dispensable and 909 species-specific gene families. The dispensable genome was enriched for genes related to key agronomic traits. Structural variations between cultivated and wild genomes were used to construct a graph-based genome, revealing variations in genes affecting traits such as flowering time, vernalization and disease resistance. These variations will facilitate the transfer of valuable traits from wild Cicer species into elite chickpea varieties through marker-assisted selection or gene-editing. This study offers valuable insights into the genetic diversity and potential avenues for crop improvement in chickpea.
To understand the role of extrachromosomal DNA (ecDNA) amplifications in cancer progression, we detected and classified focal amplifications in 8,060 newly diagnosed primary cancers, untreated metastases and heavily pretreated tumors. The ecDNAs were detected at significantly higher frequency in untreated metastatic and pretreated tumors compared to newly diagnosed cancers. Tumors from chemotherapy-pretreated patients showed significantly higher ecDNA frequency compared to untreated cancers. In particular, tubulin inhibition associated with ecDNA increases, suggesting a role for ecDNA in treatment response. In longitudinally matched tumor samples, ecDNAs were more likely to be retained compared to chromosomal amplifications. EcDNAs shared between time points, and ecDNAs in advanced cancers were more likely to harbor localized hypermutation events compared to private ecDNAs and ecDNAs in newly diagnosed tumors. Relatively high variant allele fractions of ecDNA localized hypermutations implicated early ecDNA mutagenesis. Our findings nominate ecDNAs to provide tumors with competitive advantages during cancer progression and metastasis.
The extent of cell-to-cell variation in tumor mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number and genotype, and the phenotypic and evolutionary consequences of such variation, are poorly characterized. Here we use amplification-free single-cell whole-genome sequencing (Direct Library Prep (DLP+)) to simultaneously assay mtDNA copy number and nuclear DNA (nuDNA) in 72,275 single cells derived from immortalized cell lines, patient-derived xenografts and primary human tumors. Cells typically contained thousands of mtDNA copies, but variation in mtDNA copy number was extensive and strongly associated with cell size. Pervasive whole-genome doubling events in nuDNA associated with stoichiometrically balanced adaptations in mtDNA copy number, implying that mtDNA-to-nuDNA ratio, rather than mtDNA copy number itself, mediated downstream phenotypes. Finally, multimodal analysis of DLP+ and single-cell RNA sequencing identified both somatic loss-of-function and germline noncoding variants in mtDNA linked to heteroplasmy-dependent changes in mtDNA copy number and mitochondrial transcription, revealing phenotypic adaptations to disrupted nuclear/mitochondrial balance.
Rare damaging variants in a large number of genes are known to cause monogenic developmental disorders (DDs) and have also been shown to cause milder subclinical phenotypes in population cohorts. Here, we show that carrying multiple (2-5) rare damaging variants across 599 dominant DD genes has an additive adverse effect on numerous cognitive and socioeconomic traits in UK Biobank, which can be partially counterbalanced by a higher educational attainment polygenic score (EA-PGS). Phenotypic deviators from expected EA-PGS could be partly explained by the enrichment or depletion of rare DD variants. Among carriers of rare DD variants, those with a DD-related clinical diagnosis had a substantially lower EA-PGS and more severe phenotype than those without a clinical diagnosis. Our results suggest that the overall burden of both rare and common variants can modify the expressivity of a phenotype, which may then influence whether an individual reaches the threshold for clinical disease.
Tumor genomic profiling is increasingly seen as a prerequisite to guide the treatment of patients with cancer. To explore the value of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in broadening the scope of cancers potentially amenable to a precision therapy, we analysed whole-genome sequencing data on 10,478 patients spanning 35 cancer types recruited to the UK 100,000 Genomes Project. We identified 330 candidate driver genes, including 74 that are new to any cancer. We estimate that approximately 55% of patients studied harbor at least one clinically relevant mutation, predicting either sensitivity or resistance to certain treatments or clinical trial eligibility. By performing computational chemogenomic analysis of cancer mutations we identify additional targets for compounds that represent attractive candidates for future clinical trials. This study represents one of the most comprehensive efforts thus far to identify cancer driver genes in the real world setting and assess their impact on informing precision oncology.
Structural variation, such as deletions, duplications, inversions and complex rearrangements, can have profound effects on gene expression, genome stability, phenotypic diversity and disease susceptibility. Structural variants can encompass up to millions of bases and have the potential to rearrange substantial segments of the genome. They contribute considerably more to genetic diversity in human populations and have larger effects on phenotypic traits than point mutations. Until recently, our understanding of the effects of structural variants was driven mainly by studying naturally occurring variation. New genome-engineering tools capable of generating deletions, insertions, inversions and translocations, together with the discovery of new recombinases and advances in creating synthetic DNA constructs, now enable the design and generation of an extended range of structural variation. Here, we discuss these tools and examples of their application and highlight existing challenges that will need to be overcome to fully harness their potential.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and influenza are respiratory illnesses caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and influenza viruses, respectively. Both diseases share symptoms and clinical risk factors(1), but the extent to which these conditions have a common genetic etiology is unknown. This is partly because host genetic risk factors are well characterized for COVID-19 but not for influenza, with the largest published genome-wide association studies for these conditions including >2 million individuals(2) and about 1,000 individuals(3,4,5,6), respectively. Shared genetic risk factors could point to targets to prevent or treat both infections. Through a genetic study of 18,334 cases with a positive test for influenza and 276,295 controls, we show that published COVID-19 risk variants are not associated with influenza. Furthermore, we discovered and replicated an association between influenza infection and noncoding variants in B3GALT5 and ST6GAL1, neither of which was associated with COVID-19. In vitro small interfering RNA knockdown of ST6GAL1-an enzyme that adds sialic acid to the cell surface, which is used for viral entry-reduced influenza infectivity by 57%. These results mirror the observation that variants that downregulate ACE2, the SARS-CoV-2 receptor, protect against COVID-19 (ref. (7)). Collectively, these findings highlight downregulation of key cell surface receptors used for viral entry as treatment opportunities to prevent COVID-19 and influenza.
Human genetic variants are associated with many traits through largely unknown mechanisms. Here, combining approximately 260,000 Japanese study participants, a Japanese-specific genotype reference panel and statistical fine-mapping, we identified 4,423 significant loci across 63 quantitative traits, among which 601 were new, and 9,406 putatively causal variants. New associations included Japanese-specific coding, splicing and noncoding variants, exemplified by a damaging missense variant rs730881101 in TNNT2 associated with lower heart function and increased risk for heart failure (P = 1.4 x 10-15 and odds ratio = 4.5, 95% confidence interval = 3.1-6.5). Putative causal noncoding variants were supported by state-of-art in silico functional assays and had comparable effect sizes to coding variants. A plausible example of new mechanisms of causal variants is an enrichment of causal variants in 3 ' untranslated regions (UTRs), including the Japanese-specific rs13306436 in IL6 associated with pro-inflammatory traits and protection against tuberculosis. We experimentally showed that transcripts with rs13306436 are resistant to mRNA degradation by regnase-1, an RNA-binding protein. Our study provides a list of fine-mapped causal variants to be tested for functionality and underscores the importance of sequencing, genotyping and association efforts in diverse populations.
Many enhancers control gene expression by assembling regulatory factor clusters, also referred to as condensates. This process is vital for facilitating enhancer communication and establishing cellular identity. However, how DNA sequence and transcription factor (TF) binding instruct the formation of high regulatory factor environments remains poorly understood. Here we developed a new approach leveraging enhancer-centric chromatin accessibility quantitative trait loci (caQTLs) to nominate regulatory factor clusters genome-wide. By analyzing TF-binding signatures within the context of caQTLs and comparing episomal versus endogenous enhancer activities, we discovered a class of regulators, 'context-only' TFs, that amplify the activity of cell type-specific caQTL-binding TFs, that is, 'context-initiator' TFs. Similar to super-enhancers, enhancers enriched for context-only TF-binding sites display high coactivator binding and sensitivity to bromodomain-inhibiting molecules. We further show that binding sites for context-only and context-initiator TFs underlie enhancer coordination, providing a mechanistic rationale for how a loose TF syntax confers regulatory specificity.
The long delay before genomic technologies become available in low- and middle-income countries is a concern from both scientific and ethical standpoints. Polygenic risk scores (PRSs), a relatively recent advance in genomics, could have a substantial impact on promoting health by improving disease risk prediction and guiding preventive strategies. However, clinical use of PRSs in their current forms might widen global health disparities, as their portability to diverse groups is limited. This Perspective highlights the need for global collaboration to develop and implement PRSs that perform equitably across the world. Such collaboration requires capacity building and the generation of new data in low-resource settings, the sharing of harmonized genotype and phenotype data securely across borders, novel population genetics and statistical methods to improve PRS performance, and thoughtful clinical implementation in diverse settings. All this needs to occur while considering the ethical, legal and social implications, with support from regulatory and funding agencies and policymakers.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a complex disorder that manifests variability in long-term outcomes and clinical presentations. The genetic contributions to such heterogeneity are not well understood. Here we show several genetic links to clinical heterogeneity in ADHD in a case-only study of 14,084 diagnosed individuals. First, we identify one genome-wide significant locus by comparing cases with ADHD and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) to cases with ADHD but not ASD. Second, we show that cases with ASD and ADHD, substance use disorder and ADHD, or first diagnosed with ADHD in adulthood have unique polygenic score (PGS) profiles that distinguish them from complementary case subgroups and controls. Finally, a PGS for an ASD diagnosis in ADHD cases predicted cognitive performance in an independent developmental cohort. Our approach uncovered evidence of genetic heterogeneity in ADHD, helping us to understand its etiology and providing a model for studies of other disorders.
Few transcription factors have been examined for their direct roles in physically connecting enhancers and promoters. Here acute degradation of Yin Yang 1 (YY1) in erythroid cells revealed its requirement for the maintenance of numerous enhancer-promoter loops, but not compartments or domains. Despite its reported ability to interact with cohesin, the formation of YY1-dependent enhancer-promoter loops does not involve stalling of cohesin-mediated loop extrusion. Integrating mitosis-to-G1-phase dynamics, we observed partial retention of YY1 on mitotic chromatin, predominantly at gene promoters, followed by rapid rebinding during mitotic exit, coinciding with enhancer-promoter loop establishment. YY1 degradation during the mitosis-to-G1-phase interval revealed a set of enhancer-promoter loops that require YY1 for establishment during G1-phase entry but not for maintenance in interphase, suggesting that cell cycle stage influences YY1's architectural function. Thus, as revealed here for YY1, chromatin architectural functions of transcription factors can vary in their interplay with CTCF and cohesin as well as by cell cycle stage.
Genome-wide association studies of colorectal cancer (CRC) have identified 170 autosomal risk loci. However, for most of these, the functional variants and their target genes are unknown. Here, we perform statistical fine-mapping incorporating tissue-specific epigenetic annotations and massively parallel reporter assays to systematically prioritize functional variants for each CRC risk locus. We identify plausible causal variants for the 170 risk loci, with a single variant for 40. We link these variants to 208 target genes by analyzing colon-specific quantitative trait loci and implementing the activity-by-contact model, which integrates epigenomic features and Micro-C data, to predict enhancer-gene connections. By deciphering CRC risk loci, we identify direct links between risk variants and target genes, providing further insight into the molecular basis of CRC susceptibility and highlighting potential pharmaceutical targets for prevention and treatment.
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) is a powerful tool for introducing targeted mutations in DNA, but recent studies have shown that it can have unintended effects such as structural changes. However, these studies have not yet looked genome wide or across data types. Here we performed a phenotypic CRISPR-Cas9 scan targeting 17,065 genes in primary human cells, revealing a 'proximity bias' in which CRISPR knockouts show unexpected similarities to unrelated genes on the same chromosome arm. This bias was found to be consistent across cell types, laboratories, Cas9 delivery methods and assay modalities, and the data suggest that it is caused by telomeric truncations of chromosome arms, with cell cycle and apoptotic pathways playing a mediating role. Additionally, a simple correction is demonstrated to mitigate this pervasive bias while preserving biological relationships. This previously uncharacterized effect has implications for functional genomic studies using CRISPR-Cas9, with applications in discovery biology, drug-target identification, cell therapies and genetic therapeutics.
Chromosomal instability is a major driver of intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH), promoting tumor progression. In the present study, we combined structural variant discovery and nucleosome occupancy profiling with transcriptomic and immunophenotypic changes in single cells to study ITH in complex karyotype acute myeloid leukemia (CK-AML). We observed complex structural variant landscapes within individual cells of patients with CK-AML characterized by linear and circular breakage-fusion-bridge cycles and chromothripsis. We identified three clonal evolution patterns in diagnosis or salvage CK-AML (monoclonal, linear and branched polyclonal), with 75% harboring multiple subclones that frequently displayed ongoing karyotype remodeling. Using patient-derived xenografts, we demonstrated varied clonal evolution of leukemic stem cells (LSCs) and further dissected subclone-specific drug-response profiles to identify LSC-targeting therapies, including BCL-xL inhibition. In paired longitudinal patient samples, we further revealed genetic evolution and cell-type plasticity as mechanisms of disease progression. By dissecting dynamic genomic, phenotypic and functional complexity of CK-AML, our findings offer clinically relevant avenues for characterizing and targeting disease-driving LSCs.
Germline BRCA1 mutation carriers face a high breast cancer risk; however, the underlying mechanisms for this risk are not completely understood. Using a new genetically engineered mouse model of germline Brca1 heterozygosity, we demonstrate that early tumor onset in a Brca1 heterozygous background cannot be fully explained by the conventional 'two-hit' hypothesis, suggesting the existence of inherent tumor-promoting alterations in the Brca1 heterozygous state. Single-cell RNA sequencing and assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing analyses uncover a unique set of differentially accessible chromatin regions in ostensibly normal Brca1 heterozygous mammary epithelial cells, distinct from wild-type cells and partially mimicking the chromatin and RNA-level changes in tumor cells. Transcription factor analyses identify loss of ELF5 and gain of AP-1 sites in these epigenetically primed regions; in vivo experiments further implicate AP-1 and Wnt10a as strong promoters of Brca1-related breast cancer. These findings reveal a previously unappreciated epigenetic effect of Brca1 haploinsufficiency in accelerating tumorigenesis, advancing our mechanistic understanding and informing potential therapeutic strategies.
Polyploidy is an important driving force in speciation and evolution; however, the genomic basis for parallel selection of a particular trait between polyploids and ancestral diploids remains unexplored. Here we construct graph-based pan-genomes for diploid (A2) and allotetraploid (AD1) cotton species, enabled by an assembly of 50 genomes of genetically diverse accessions. We delineate a mosaic genome map of tetraploid cultivars that illustrates genomic contributions from semi-wild forms into modern cultivars. Pan-genome comparisons identify syntenic and hyper-divergent regions of continued variation between diploid and tetraploid cottons, and suggest an ongoing process of sequence evolution potentially linked to the contrasting genome size change in two subgenomes. We highlight 43% of genetic regulatory relationships for gene expression in diploid encompassing sequence divergence after polyploidy, and specifically characterize six underexplored convergent genetic loci contributing to parallel selection of fiber quality. This study offers a framework for pan-genomic dissection of genetic regulatory components underlying parallel selection of desirable traits in organisms.
Dwarfing rootstocks have transformed the production of cultivated apples; however, the genetic basis of rootstock-induced dwarfing remains largely unclear. We have assembled chromosome-level, near-gapless and haplotype-resolved genomes for the popular dwarfing rootstock 'M9', the semi-vigorous rootstock 'MM106' and 'Fuji', one of the most commonly grown apple cultivars. The apple orthologue of auxin response factor 3 (MdARF3) is in the Dw1 region of 'M9', the major locus for rootstock-induced dwarfing. Comparing 'M9' and 'MM106' genomes revealed a 9,723-bp allele-specific long terminal repeat retrotransposon/gypsy insertion, DwTE, located upstream of MdARF3. DwTE is cosegregated with the dwarfing trait in two segregating populations, suggesting its prospective utility in future dwarfing rootstock breeding. In addition, our pipeline discovered mobile mRNAs that may contribute to the development of dwarfed scion architecture. Our research provides valuable genomic resources and applicable methodology, which have the potential to accelerate breeding dwarfing rootstocks for apple and other perennial woody fruit trees.
Brassica oleracea, globally cultivated for its vegetable crops, consists of very diverse morphotypes, characterized by specialized enlarged organs as harvested products. This makes B. oleracea an ideal model for studying rapid evolution and domestication. We constructed a B. oleracea pan-genome from 27 high-quality genomes representing all morphotypes and their wild relatives. We identified structural variations (SVs) among these genomes and characterized these in 704 B. oleracea accessions using graph-based genome tools. We show that SVs exert bidirectional effects on the expression of numerous genes, either suppressing through DNA methylation or promoting probably by harboring transcription factor-binding elements. The following examples illustrate the role of SVs modulating gene expression: SVs promoting BoPNY and suppressing BoCKX3 in cauliflower/broccoli, suppressing BoKAN1 and BoACS4 in cabbage and promoting BoMYBtf in ornamental kale. These results provide solid evidence for the role of SVs as dosage regulators of gene expression, driving B. oleracea domestication and diversification.
Long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE-1 or L1) is a retrotransposon group that constitutes 17% of the human genome and shows variable expression across cell types. However, the control of L1 expression and its function in gene regulation are incompletely understood. Here we show that L1 transcription activates long-range gene expression. Genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening using a reporter driven by the L1 5 ' UTR in human cells identifies functionally diverse genes affecting L1 expression. Unexpectedly, altering L1 expression by knockout of regulatory genes impacts distant gene expression. L1s can physically contact their distal target genes, with these interactions becoming stronger upon L1 activation and weaker when L1 is silenced. Remarkably, L1s contact and activate genes essential for zygotic genome activation (ZGA), and L1 knockdown impairs ZGA, leading to developmental arrest in mouse embryos. These results characterize the regulation and function of L1 in long-range gene activation and reveal its importance in mammalian ZGA.
Although originally primarily a system for functional biology, Arabidopsis thaliana has, owing to its broad geographical distribution and adaptation to diverse environments, developed into a powerful model in population genomics. Here we present chromosome-level genome assemblies of 69 accessions from a global species range. We found that genomic colinearity is very conserved, even among geographically and genetically distant accessions. Along chromosome arms, megabase-scale rearrangements are rare and typically present only in a single accession. This indicates that the karyotype is quasi-fixed and that rearrangements in chromosome arms are counter-selected. Centromeric regions display higher structural dynamics, and divergences in core centromeres account for most of the genome size variations. Pan-genome analyses uncovered 32,986 distinct gene families, 60% being present in all accessions and 40% appearing to be dispensable, including 18% private to a single accession, indicating unexplored genic diversity. These 69 new Arabidopsis thaliana genome assemblies will empower future genetic research.
Autoimmune and inflammatory diseases are polygenic disorders of the immune system. Many genomic loci harbor risk alleles for several diseases, but the limited resolution of genetic mapping prevents determining whether the same allele is responsible, indicating a shared underlying mechanism. Here, using a collection of 129,058 cases and controls across 6 diseases, we show that similar to 40% of overlapping associations are due to the same allele. We improve fine-mapping resolution for shared alleles twofold by combining cases and controls across diseases, allowing us to identify more expression quantitative trait loci driven by the shared alleles. The patterns indicate widespread sharing of pathogenic mechanisms but not a single global autoimmune mechanism. Our approach can be applied to any set of traits and is particularly valuable as sample collections become depleted.
Transcriptome-wide association studies (TWASs) aim to integrate genome-wide association studies with expression-mapping studies to identify genes with genetically predicted expression (GReX) associated with a complex trait. In the present report, we develop a method, GIFT (gene-based integrative fine-mapping through conditional TWAS), that performs conditional TWAS analysis by explicitly controlling for GReX of all other genes residing in a local region to fine-map putatively causal genes. GIFT is frequentist in nature, explicitly models both expression correlation and cis-single nucleotide polymorphism linkage disequilibrium across multiple genes and uses a likelihood framework to account for expression prediction uncertainty. As a result, GIFT produces calibrated P values and is effective for fine-mapping. We apply GIFT to analyze six traits in the UK Biobank, where GIFT narrows down the set size of putatively causal genes by 32.16-91.32% compared with existing TWAS fine-mapping approaches. The genes identified by GIFT highlight the importance of vessel regulation in determining blood pressures and lipid metabolism for regulating lipid levels.
Unlike megabats, which rely on well-developed vision, microbats use ultrasonic echolocation to navigate and locate prey. To study ultrasound perception, here we compared the auditory cortices of microbats and megabats by constructing reference genomes and single-nucleus atlases for four species. We found that parvalbumin (PV)+ neurons exhibited evident cross-species differences and could respond to ultrasound signals, whereas their silencing severely affected ultrasound perception in the mouse auditory cortex. Moreover, megabat PV+ neurons expressed low levels of complexins (CPLX1-CPLX4), which can facilitate neurotransmitter release, while microbat PV+ neurons highly expressed CPLX1, which improves neurotransmission efficiency. Further perturbation of Cplx1 in PV+ neurons impaired ultrasound perception in the mouse auditory cortex. In addition, CPLX1 functioned in other parts of the auditory pathway in microbats but not megabats and exhibited convergent evolution between echolocating microbats and whales. Altogether, we conclude that CPLX1 expression throughout the entire auditory pathway can enhance mammalian ultrasound neurotransmission.
Peas are essential for human nutrition and played a crucial role in the discovery of Mendelian laws of inheritance. In this study, we assembled the genome of the elite vegetable pea cultivar 'Zhewan No. 1' at the chromosome level and analyzed resequencing data from 314 accessions, creating a comprehensive map of genetic variation in peas. We identified 235 candidate loci associated with 57 important agronomic traits through genome-wide association studies. Notably, we pinpointed the causal gene haplotypes responsible for four Mendelian traits: stem length (Le/le), flower color (A/a), cotyledon color (I/i) and seed shape (R/r). Additionally, we discovered the genes controlling pod form (Mendelian P/p) and hilum color. Our study also involved constructing a gene expression atlas across 22 tissues, highlighting key gene modules related to pod and seed development. These findings provide valuable pea genomic information and will facilitate the future genome-informed improvement of pea crops.
Grapevine breeding is hindered by a limited understanding of the genetic basis of complex agronomic traits. This study constructs a graph-based pangenome reference (Grapepan v.1.0) from 18 newly generated phased telomere-to-telomere assemblies and 11 published assemblies. Using Grapepan v.1.0, we build a variation map with 9,105,787 short variations and 236,449 structural variations (SVs) from the resequencing data of 466 grapevine cultivars. Integrating SVs into a genome-wide association study, we map 148 quantitative trait loci for 29 agronomic traits (50.7% newly identified), with 12 traits significantly contributed by SVs. The estimated heritability improves by 22.78% on average when including SVs. We discovered quantitative trait locus regions under divergent artificial selection in metabolism and berry development between wine and table grapes, respectively. Moreover, significant genetic correlations were detected among the 29 traits. Under a polygenic model, we conducted genomic predictions for each trait. In general, our study facilitates the breeding of superior cultivars via the genomic selection of multiple traits.
Kidney failure, the decrease of kidney function below a threshold necessary to support life, is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 406,504 individuals in the UK Biobank, identifying 430 loci affecting kidney function in middle-aged adults. To investigate the cell types affected by these loci, we integrated the GWAS with human kidney candidate cis-regulatory elements (cCREs) identified using single-cell assay for transposase-accessible chromatin sequencing (scATAC-seq). Overall, 56% of kidney function heritability localized to kidney tubule epithelial cCREs and an additional 7% to kidney podocyte cCREs. Thus, most heritable differences in adult kidney function are a result of altered gene expression in these two cell types. Using enhancer assays, allele-specific scATAC-seq and machine learning, we found that many kidney function variants alter tubule epithelial cCRE chromatin accessibility and function. Using CRISPRi, we determined which genes some of these cCREs regulate, implicating NDRG1, CCNB1 and STC1 in human kidney function.
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) is an important allotetraploid oil and food legume crop. China is one of the world's largest peanut producers and consumers. However, genomic variations underlying the migration and divergence of peanuts in China remain unclear. Here we reported a genome-wide variation map based on the resequencing of 390 peanut accessions, suggesting that peanuts might have been introduced into southern and northern China separately, forming two cultivation centers. Selective sweep analysis highlights asymmetric selection between the two subgenomes during peanut improvement. A classical pedigree from South China offers a context for the examination of the impact of artificial selection on peanut genome. Genome-wide association studies identified 22,309 significant associations with 28 agronomic traits, including candidate genes for plant architecture and oil biosynthesis. Our findings shed light on peanut migration and diversity in China and provide valuable genomic resources for peanut improvement.
Large-scale genomic variations are fundamental resources for crop genetics and breeding. Here we sequenced 1,904 genomes of broomcorn millet to an average of 40x sequencing depth and constructed a comprehensive variation map of weedy and cultivated accessions. Being one of the oldest cultivated crops, broomcorn millet has extremely low nucleotide diversity and remarkably rapid decay of linkage disequilibrium. Genome-wide association studies identified 186 loci for 12 agronomic traits. Many causative candidate genes, such as PmGW8 for grain size and PmLG1 for panicle shape, showed strong selection signatures during domestication. Weedy accessions contained many beneficial variations for the grain traits that are largely lost in cultivated accessions. Weedy and cultivated broomcorn millet have adopted different loci controlling flowering time for regional adaptation in parallel. Our study uncovers the unique population genomic features of broomcorn millet and provides an agronomically important resource for cereal crops.
Intratumor heterogeneity underlies cancer evolution and treatment resistance, but targetable mechanisms driving intratumor heterogeneity are poorly understood. Meningiomas are the most common primary intracranial tumors and are resistant to all medical therapies, and high-grade meningiomas have significant intratumor heterogeneity. Here we use spatial approaches to identify genomic, biochemical and cellular mechanisms linking intratumor heterogeneity to the molecular, temporal and spatial evolution of high-grade meningiomas. We show that divergent intratumor gene and protein expression programs distinguish high-grade meningiomas that are otherwise grouped together by current classification systems. Analyses of matched pairs of primary and recurrent meningiomas reveal spatial expansion of subclonal copy number variants associated with treatment resistance. Multiplexed sequential immunofluorescence and deconvolution of meningioma spatial transcriptomes using cell types from single-cell RNA sequencing show decreased immune infiltration, decreased MAPK signaling, increased PI3K-AKT signaling and increased cell proliferation, which are associated with meningioma recurrence. To translate these findings to preclinical models, we use CRISPR interference and lineage tracing approaches to identify combination therapies that target intratumor heterogeneity in meningioma cell co-cultures.
Proliferation is a key hallmark of cancer, but whether it differs between evolutionarily distinct clones co-existing within a tumor is unknown. We introduce the Single-cell Proliferation Rate Inference in Non-homogeneous Tumors through Evolutionary Routes (SPRINTER) algorithm that uses single-cell whole-genome DNA sequencing data to enable accurate identification and clone assignment of S- and G2-phase cells, as assessed by generating accurate ground truth data. Applied to a newly generated longitudinal, primary-metastasis-matched dataset of 14,994 non-small cell lung cancer cells, SPRINTER revealed widespread clone proliferation heterogeneity, orthogonally supported by Ki-67 staining, nuclei imaging and clinical imaging. We further demonstrated that high-proliferation clones have increased metastatic seeding potential, increased circulating tumor DNA shedding and clone-specific altered replication timing in proliferation- or metastasis-related genes associated with expression changes. Applied to previously generated datasets of 61,914 breast and ovarian cancer cells, SPRINTER revealed increased single-cell rates of different genomic variants and enrichment of proliferation-related gene amplifications in high-proliferation clones.
Polyploidy (genome duplication) is a pivotal force in evolution. However, the interactions between parental genomes in a polyploid nucleus, frequently involving subgenome dominance, are poorly understood. Here we showcase analyses of a bamboo system (Poaceae: Bambusoideae) comprising a series of lineages from diploid (herbaceous) to tetraploid and hexaploid (woody), with 11 chromosome-level de novo genome assemblies and 476 transcriptome samples. We find that woody bamboo subgenomes exhibit stunning karyotype stability, with parallel subgenome dominance in the two tetraploid clades and a gradual shift of dominance in the hexaploid clade. Allopolyploidization and subgenome dominance have shaped the evolution of tree-like lignified culms, rapid growth and synchronous flowering characteristic of woody bamboos as large grasses. Our work provides insights into genome dominance in a remarkable polyploid system, including its dependence on genomic context and its ability to switch which subgenomes are dominant over evolutionary time.
Health equity is the state in which everyone has fair and just opportunities to attain their highest level of health. The field of human genomics has fallen short in increasing health equity, largely because the diversity of the human population has been inadequately reflected among participants of genomics research. This lack of diversity leads to disparities that can have scientific and clinical consequences. Achieving health equity related to genomics will require greater effort in addressing inequities within the field. As part of the commitment of the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) to advancing health equity, it convened experts in genomics and health equity research to make recommendations and performed a review of current literature to identify the landscape of gaps and opportunities at the interface between human genomics and health equity research. This Perspective describes these findings and examines health equity within the context of human genomics and genomic medicine.
The presence of basal lineage characteristics signifies hyperaggressive human adenocarcinomas of the breast, bladder and pancreas. However, the biochemical mechanisms that maintain this aberrant cell state are poorly understood. Here we performed marker-based genetic screens in search of factors needed to maintain basal identity in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). This approach revealed MED12 as a powerful regulator of the basal cell state in this disease. Using biochemical reconstitution and epigenomics, we show that MED12 carries out this function by bridging the transcription factor Delta Np63, a known master regulator of the basal lineage, with the Mediator complex to activate lineage-specific enhancer elements. Consistent with this finding, the growth of basal-like PDAC is hypersensitive to MED12 loss when compared to PDAC cells lacking basal characteristics. Taken together, our genetic screens have revealed a biochemical interaction that sustains basal identity in human cancer, which could serve as a target for tumor lineage-directed therapeutics.
Molecular stratification using gene-level transcriptional data has identified subtypes with distinctive genotypic and phenotypic traits, as exemplified by the consensus molecular subtypes (CMS) in colorectal cancer (CRC). Here, rather than gene-level data, we make use of gene ontology and biological activation state information for initial molecular class discovery. In doing so, we defined three pathway-derived subtypes (PDS) in CRC: PDS1 tumors, which are canonical/LGR5+ stem-rich, highly proliferative and display good prognosis; PDS2 tumors, which are regenerative/ANXA1+ stem-rich, with elevated stromal and immune tumor microenvironmental lineages; and PDS3 tumors, which represent a previously overlooked slow-cycling subset of tumors within CMS2 with reduced stem populations and increased differentiated lineages, particularly enterocytes and enteroendocrine cells, yet display the worst prognosis in locally advanced disease. These PDS3 phenotypic traits are evident across numerous bulk and single-cell datasets, and demark a series of subtle biological states that are currently under-represented in pre-clinical models and are not identified using existing subtyping classifiers.
The complex and dynamic cellular composition of the human endometrium remains poorly understood. Previous endometrial single-cell atlases profiled few donors and lacked consensus in defining cell types. We introduce the Human Endometrial Cell Atlas (HECA), a high-resolution single-cell reference atlas (313,527 cells) combining published and new endometrial single-cell transcriptomics datasets of 63 women with and without endometriosis. HECA assigns consensus and identifies previously unreported cell types, mapped in situ using spatial transcriptomics and validated using a new independent single-nuclei dataset (312,246 nuclei, 63 donors). In the functionalis, we identify intricate stromal-epithelial cell coordination via transforming growth factor beta (TGF beta) signaling. In the basalis, we define signaling between fibroblasts and an epithelial population expressing progenitor markers. Integration of HECA with large-scale endometriosis genome-wide association study data pinpoints decidualized stromal cells and macrophages as most likely dysregulated in endometriosis. The HECA is a valuable resource for studying endometrial physiology and disorders, and for guiding microphysiological in vitro systems development.
Brain region-specific degeneration and somatic expansions of the mutant Huntingtin (mHTT) CAG tract are key features of Huntington's disease (HD). However, the relationships among CAG expansions, death of specific cell types and molecular events associated with these processes are not established. Here, we used fluorescence-activated nuclear sorting (FANS) and deep molecular profiling to gain insight into the properties of cell types of the human striatum and cerebellum in HD and control donors. CAG expansions arise at mHTT in striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs), cholinergic interneurons and cerebellar Purkinje neurons, and at mutant ATXN3 in MSNs from SCA3 donors. CAG expansions in MSNs are associated with higher levels of MSH2 and MSH3 (forming MutS beta), which can inhibit nucleolytic excision of CAG slip-outs by FAN1. Our data support a model in which CAG expansions are necessary but may not be sufficient for cell death and identify transcriptional changes associated with somatic CAG expansions and striatal toxicity.
Within population biobanks, incomplete measurement of certain traits limits the power for genetic discovery. Machine learning is increasingly used to impute the missing values from the available data. However, performing genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on imputed traits can introduce spurious associations, identifying genetic variants that are not associated with the original trait. Here we introduce a new method, synthetic surrogate (SynSurr) analysis, which makes GWAS on imputed phenotypes robust to imputation errors. Rather than replacing missing values, SynSurr jointly analyzes the original and imputed traits. We show that SynSurr estimates the same genetic effect as standard GWAS and improves power in proportion to the quality of the imputations. SynSurr requires a commonly made missing-at-random assumption but relaxes the requirements of existing imputation methods by not requiring correct model specification. We present extensive simulations and ablation analyses to validate SynSurr and apply it to empower the GWAS of dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry traits within the UK Biobank.
Most genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of major depression (MD) have been conducted in samples of European ancestry. Here we report a multi-ancestry GWAS of MD, adding data from 21 cohorts with 88,316 MD cases and 902,757 controls to previously reported data. This analysis used a range of measures to define MD and included samples of African (36% of effective sample size), East Asian (26%) and South Asian (6%) ancestry and Hispanic/Latin American participants (32%). The multi-ancestry GWAS identified 53 significantly associated novel loci. For loci from GWAS in European ancestry samples, fewer than expected were transferable to other ancestry groups. Fine mapping benefited from additional sample diversity. A transcriptome-wide association study identified 205 significantly associated novel genes. These findings suggest that, for MD, increasing ancestral and global diversity in genetic studies may be particularly important to ensure discovery of core genes and inform about transferability of findings.
Machine learning (ML) has become increasingly popular in almost all scientific disciplines, including human genetics. Owing to challenges related to sample collection and precise phenotyping, ML-assisted genome-wide association study (GWAS), which uses sophisticated ML techniques to impute phenotypes and then performs GWAS on the imputed outcomes, have become increasingly common in complex trait genetics research. However, the validity of ML-assisted GWAS associations has not been carefully evaluated. Here, we report pervasive risks for false-positive associations in ML-assisted GWAS and introduce Post-Prediction GWAS (POP-GWAS), a statistical framework that redesigns GWAS on ML-imputed outcomes. POP-GWAS ensures valid and powerful statistical inference irrespective of imputation quality and choice of algorithm, requiring only GWAS summary statistics as input. We employed POP-GWAS to perform a GWAS of bone mineral density derived from dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry imaging at 14 skeletal sites, identifying 89 new loci and revealing skeletal site-specific genetic architecture. Our framework offers a robust analytic solution for future ML-assisted GWAS.
We present a gene-level regulatory model, single-cell ATAC + RNA linking (SCARlink), which predicts single-cell gene expression and links enhancers to target genes using multi-ome (scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq co-assay) sequencing data. The approach uses regularized Poisson regression on tile-level accessibility data to jointly model all regulatory effects at a gene locus, avoiding the limitations of pairwise gene-peak correlations and dependence on peak calling. SCARlink outperformed existing gene scoring methods for imputing gene expression from chromatin accessibility across high-coverage multi-ome datasets while giving comparable to improved performance on low-coverage datasets. Shapley value analysis on trained models identified cell-type-specific gene enhancers that are validated by promoter capture Hi-C and are 11x to 15x and 5x to 12x enriched in fine-mapped eQTLs and fine-mapped genome-wide association study (GWAS) variants, respectively. We further show that SCARlink-predicted and observed gene expression vectors provide a robust way to compute a chromatin potential vector field to enable developmental trajectory analysis.
The pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) depends on environmental and heritable factors, with its molecular etiology still unclear. Here we present a spatial transcriptomic (ST) and single-nucleus transcriptomic survey of late-onset sporadic AD and AD in Down syndrome (DSAD). Studying DSAD provides an opportunity to enhance our understanding of the AD transcriptome, potentially bridging the gap between genetic mouse models and sporadic AD. We identified transcriptomic changes that may underlie cortical layer-preferential pathology accumulation. Spatial co-expression network analyses revealed transient and regionally restricted disease processes, including a glial inflammatory program dysregulated in upper cortical layers and implicated in AD genetic risk and amyloid-associated processes. Cell-cell communication analysis further contextualized this gene program in dysregulated signaling networks. Finally, we generated ST data from an amyloid AD mouse model to identify cross-species amyloid-proximal transcriptomic changes with conformational context.
Cis-regulatory elements (CREs) interact with trans regulators to orchestrate gene expression, but how transcriptional regulation is coordinated in multi-gene loci has not been experimentally defined. We sought to characterize the CREs controlling dynamic expression of the adjacent costimulatory genes CD28, CTLA4 and ICOS, encoding regulators of T cell-mediated immunity. Tiling CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) screens in primary human T cells, both conventional and regulatory subsets, uncovered gene-, cell subset- and stimulation-specific CREs. Integration with CRISPR knockout screens and assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (ATAC-seq) profiling identified trans regulators influencing chromatin states at specific CRISPRi-responsive elements to control costimulatory gene expression. We then discovered a critical CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) boundary that reinforces CRE interaction with CTLA4 while also preventing promiscuous activation of CD28. By systematically mapping CREs and associated trans regulators directly in primary human T cell subsets, this work overcomes longstanding experimental limitations to decode context-dependent gene regulatory programs in a complex, multi-gene locus critical to immune homeostasis.
Polycomb group proteins have a critical role in silencing transcription during development. It is commonly proposed that Polycomb-dependent changes in genome folding, which compact chromatin, contribute directly to repression by blocking the binding of activating complexes. Recently, it has also been argued that liquid-liquid demixing of Polycomb proteins facilitates this compaction and repression by phase-separating target genes into a membraneless compartment. To test these models, we used Optical Reconstruction of Chromatin Architecture to trace the Hoxa gene cluster, a canonical Polycomb target, in thousands of single cells. Across multiple cell types, we find that Polycomb-bound chromatin frequently explores decompact states and partial mixing with neighboring chromatin, while remaining uniformly repressed, challenging the repression-by-compaction or phase-separation models. Using polymer simulations, we show that these observed flexible ensembles can be explained by 'spatial feedback'-transient contacts that contribute to the propagation of the epigenetic state (epigenetic memory), without inducing a globular organization.
Concurrent readout of sequence and base modifications from long unamplified DNA templates by Pacific Biosciences of California (PacBio) single-molecule sequencing requires large amounts of input material. Here we adapt Tn5 transposition to introduce hairpin oligonucleotides and fragment (tagment) limiting quantities of DNA for generating PacBio-compatible circular molecules. We developed two methods that implement tagmentation and use 90-99% less input than current protocols: (1) single-molecule real-time sequencing by tagmentation (SMRT-Tag), which allows detection of genetic variation and CpG methylation; and (2) single-molecule adenine-methylated oligonucleosome sequencing assay by tagmentation (SAMOSA-Tag), which uses exogenous adenine methylation to add a third channel for probing chromatin accessibility. SMRT-Tag of 40 ng or more human DNA (approximately 7,000 cell equivalents) yielded data comparable to gold standard whole-genome and bisulfite sequencing. SAMOSA-Tag of 30,000-50,000 nuclei resolved single-fiber chromatin structure, CTCF binding and DNA methylation in patient-derived prostate cancer xenografts and uncovered metastasis-associated global epigenome disorganization. Tagmentation thus promises to enable sensitive, scalable and multimodal single-molecule genomics for diverse basic and clinical applications.
Insufficient thyroid hormone production in newborns is referred to as congenital hypothyroidism. Multinodular goiter (MNG), characterized by an enlarged thyroid gland with multiple nodules, is usually seen in adults and is recognized as a separate disorder from congenital hypothyroidism. Here we performed a linkage analysis of a family with both nongoitrous congenital hypothyroidism and MNG and identified a signal at 15q26.1. Follow-up analyses with whole-genome sequencing and genetic screening in congenital hypothyroidism and MNG cohorts showed that changes in a noncoding TTTG microsatellite on 15q26.1 were frequently observed in congenital hypothyroidism (137 in 989) and MNG (3 in 33) compared with controls (3 in 38,722). Characterization of the noncoding variants with epigenomic data and in vitro experiments suggested that the microsatellite is located in a thyroid-specific transcriptional repressor, and its activity is disrupted by the variants. Collectively, we presented genetic evidence linking nongoitrous congenital hypothyroidism and MNG, providing unique insights into thyroid abnormalities.
Common genetic variants confer substantial risk for chronic lung diseases, including pulmonary fibrosis. Defining the genetic control of gene expression in a cell-type-specific and context-dependent manner is critical for understanding the mechanisms through which genetic variation influences complex traits and disease pathobiology. To this end, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing of lung tissue from 66 individuals with pulmonary fibrosis and 48 unaffected donors. Using a pseudobulk approach, we mapped expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) across 38 cell types, observing both shared and cell-type-specific regulatory effects. Furthermore, we identified disease interaction eQTLs and demonstrated that this class of associations is more likely to be cell-type-specific and linked to cellular dysregulation in pulmonary fibrosis. Finally, we connected lung disease risk variants to their regulatory targets in disease-relevant cell types. These results indicate that cellular context determines the impact of genetic variation on gene expression and implicates context-specific eQTLs as key regulators of lung homeostasis and disease.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) genetics are characterized by lower discoverability than most other psychiatric disorders. The contribution to biological understanding from previous genetic studies has thus been limited. We performed a multi-ancestry meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies across 1,222,882 individuals of European ancestry (137,136 cases) and 58,051 admixed individuals with African and Native American ancestry (13,624 cases). We identified 95 genome-wide significant loci (80 new). Convergent multi-omic approaches identified 43 potential causal genes, broadly classified as neurotransmitter and ion channel synaptic modulators (for example, GRIA1, GRM8 and CACNA1E), developmental, axon guidance and transcription factors (for example, FOXP2, EFNA5 and DCC), synaptic structure and function genes (for example, PCLO, NCAM1 and PDE4B) and endocrine or immune regulators (for example, ESR1, TRAF3 and TANK). Additional top genes influence stress, immune, fear and threat-related processes, previously hypothesized to underlie PTSD neurobiology. These findings strengthen our understanding of neurobiological systems relevant to PTSD pathophysiology, while also opening new areas for investigation.
Mitochondria carry their own genetic information encoding for a subset of protein-coding genes and translational machinery essential for cellular respiration and metabolism. Despite its small size, the mitochondrial genome, its natural genetic variation and molecular phenotypes have been challenging to study using bulk sequencing approaches, due to its variation in cellular copy number, non-Mendelian modes of inheritance and propensity for mutations. Here we highlight emerging strategies designed to capture mitochondrial genetic variation across individual cells for lineage tracing and studying mitochondrial genetics in primary human cells and clinical specimens. We review recent advances surrounding single-cell mitochondrial genome sequencing and its integration with functional genomic readouts, including leveraging somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations as clonal markers that can resolve cellular population dynamics in complex human tissues. Finally, we discuss how single-cell whole mitochondrial genome sequencing approaches can be utilized to investigate mitochondrial genetics and its contribution to cellular heterogeneity and disease.
Eukaryotic genomes are organized into chromatin domains. The molecular mechanisms driving the formation of these domains are difficult to dissect in vivo and remain poorly understood. Here we reconstitute Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromatin in vitro and determine its 3D organization at subnucleosome resolution by micrococcal nuclease-based chromosome conformation capture and molecular dynamics simulations. We show that regularly spaced and phased nucleosome arrays form chromatin domains in vitro that resemble domains in vivo. This demonstrates that neither loop extrusion nor transcription is required for basic domain formation in yeast. In addition, we find that the boundaries of reconstituted domains correspond to nucleosome-free regions and that insulation strength scales with their width. Finally, we show that domain compaction depends on nucleosome linker length, with longer linkers forming more compact structures. Together, our results demonstrate that regular nucleosome positioning is important for the formation of chromatin domains and provide a proof-of-principle for bottom-up 3D genome studies.
Age at menopause (AOM) has a substantial impact on fertility and disease risk. While many loci with variants that associate with AOM have been identified through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) under an additive model, other genetic models are rarely considered(1). Here through GWAS meta-analysis under the recessive model of 174,329 postmenopausal women from Iceland, Denmark, the United Kingdom (UK; UK Biobank) and Norway, we study low-frequency variants with a large effect on AOM. We discovered that women homozygous for the stop-gain variant rs117316434(A) in CCDC201 (p.(Arg162Ter), minor allele frequency similar to 1%) reached menopause 9 years earlier than other women (P = 1.3 x 10(-15)). The genotype is present in one in 10,000 northern European women and leads to primary ovarian insufficiency in close to half of them. Consequently, homozygotes have fewer children, and the age at last childbirth is 5 years earlier (P = 3.8 x 10(-5)). The CCDC201 gene was only found in humans in 2022 and is highly expressed in oocytes. Homozygosity for CCDC201 loss-of-function has a substantial impact on female reproductive health, and homozygotes would benefit from reproductive counseling and treatment for symptoms of early menopause.
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) shows heterogeneous body mass index (BMI) sensitivity. Here, we performed stratification based on BMI to optimize predictions for BMI-related diseases. We obtained BMI-stratified datasets using data from more than 195,000 individuals (nT2D = 55,284) from BioBank Japan (BBJ) and UK Biobank. T2D heritability in the low-BMI group was greater than that in the high-BMI group. Polygenic predictions of T2D toward low-BMI targets had pseudo-R2 values that were more than 22% higher than BMI-unstratified targets. Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) from low-BMI discovery outperformed PRSs from high BMI, while PRSs from BMI-unstratified discovery performed best. Pathway-specific PRSs demonstrated the biological contributions of pathogenic pathways. Low-BMI T2D cases showed higher rates of neuropathy and retinopathy. Combining BMI stratification and a method integrating cross-population effects, T2D predictions showed greater than 37% improvements over unstratified-matched-population prediction. We replicated findings in the Tohoku Medical Megabank (n = 26,000) and the second BBJ cohort (n = 33,096). Our findings suggest that target stratification based on existing traits can improve the polygenic prediction of heterogeneous diseases.
Insulin resistance (IR) is a well-established risk factor for metabolic disease. The ratio of triglycerides to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (TG:HDL-C) is a surrogate marker of IR. We conducted a genome-wide association study of the TG:HDL-C ratio in 402,398 Europeans within the UK Biobank. We identified 369 independent SNPs, of which 114 had a false discovery rate-adjusted P value < 0.05 in other genome-wide studies of IR making them high-confidence IR-associated loci. Seventy-two of these 114 loci have not been previously associated with IR. These 114 loci cluster into five groups upon phenome-wide analysis and are enriched for candidate genes important in insulin signaling, adipocyte physiology and protein metabolism. We created a polygenic-risk score from the high-confidence IR-associated loci using 51,550 European individuals in the Michigan Genomics Initiative. We identified associations with diabetes, hyperglyceridemia, hypertension, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and ischemic heart disease. Collectively, this study provides insight into the genes, pathways, tissues and subtypes critical in IR.
The identification of a new hominin group in the Altai mountains called Denisovans was one of the most exciting discoveries in human evolution in the last decade. Unlike Neanderthal remains, the Denisovan fossil record consists of only a finger bone, jawbone, teeth and skull fragments. Leveraging the surviving Denisovan segments in modern human genomes has uncovered evidence of at least three introgression events from distinct Denisovan populations into modern humans in the past. Each of them presents different levels of relatedness to the sequenced Altai Denisovan, indicating a complex relationship between these sister lineages. Here we review the evidence suggesting that several Denisovan populations, who likely had an extensive geographical range, were adapted to distinct environments and introgressed into modern humans multiple times. We further discuss how archaic variants have been affected by demographic history, negative and positive selection and close by proposing possible new lines of future research.
Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a complex hereditary condition comprising various metabolic traits as risk factors. Although the genetics of individual MetS components have been investigated actively through large-scale genome-wide association studies, the conjoint genetic architecture has not been fully elucidated. Here, we performed the largest multivariate genome-wide association study of MetS in Europe (n(observed)=4,947,860) by leveraging genetic correlation between MetS components. We identified 1,307 genetic loci associated with MetS that were enriched primarily in brain tissues. Using transcriptomic data, we identified 11 genes associated strongly with MetS. Our phenome-wide association and Mendelian randomization analyses highlighted associations of MetS with diverse diseases beyond cardiometabolic diseases. Polygenic risk score analysis demonstrated better discrimination of MetS and predictive power in European and East Asian populations. Altogether, our findings will guide future studies aimed at elucidating the genetic architecture of MetS.
Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-responsive transcription factor that drives terminal differentiation of the prostatic luminal epithelia. By contrast, in tumors originating from these cells, AR chromatin occupancy is extensively reprogrammed to activate malignant phenotypes, the molecular mechanisms of which remain unknown. Here, we show that tumor-specific AR enhancers are critically reliant on H3K36 dimethyltransferase activity of NSD2. NSD2 expression is abnormally induced in prostate cancer, where its inactivation impairs AR transactivation potential by disrupting over 65% of its cistrome. NSD2-dependent AR sites distinctively harbor the chimeric FOXA1:AR half-motif, which exclusively comprise tumor-specific AR enhancer circuitries defined from patient specimens. NSD2 inactivation also engenders increased dependency on the NSD1 paralog, and a dual NSD1/2 PROTAC degrader is preferentially cytotoxic in AR-dependent prostate cancer models. Altogether, we characterize NSD2 as an essential AR neo-enhanceosome subunit that enables its oncogenic activity, and position NSD1/2 as viable co-targets in advanced prostate cancer.
Methylation quantitative trait loci (mQTLs) are essential for understanding the role of DNA methylation changes in genetic predisposition, yet they have not been fully characterized in East Asians (EAs). Here we identified mQTLs in whole blood from 3,523 Chinese individuals and replicated them in additional 1,858 Chinese individuals from two cohorts. Over 9% of mQTLs displayed specificity to EAs, facilitating the fine-mapping of EA-specific genetic associations, as shown for variants associated with height. Trans-mQTL hotspots revealed biological pathways contributing to EA-specific genetic associations, including an ERG-mediated 233 trans-mCpG network, implicated in hematopoietic cell differentiation, which likely reflects binding efficiency modulation of the ERG protein complex. More than 90% of mQTLs were shared between different blood cell lineages, with a smaller fraction of lineage-specific mQTLs displaying preferential hypomethylation in the respective lineages. Our study provides new insights into the mQTL landscape across genetic ancestries and their downstream effects on cellular processes and diseases/traits.
Gene expression is controlled by dynamic localization of thousands of regulatory proteins to precise genomic regions. Understanding this cell type-specific process has been a longstanding goal yet remains challenging because DNA-protein mapping methods generally study one protein at a time. Here, to address this, we developed chromatin immunoprecipitation done in parallel (ChIP-DIP) to generate genome-wide maps of hundreds of diverse regulatory proteins in a single experiment. ChIP-DIP produces highly accurate maps within large pools (>160 proteins) for all classes of DNA-associated proteins, including modified histones, chromatin regulators and transcription factors and across multiple conditions simultaneously. First, we used ChIP-DIP to measure temporal chromatin dynamics in primary dendritic cells following LPS stimulation. Next, we explored quantitative combinations of histone modifications that define distinct classes of regulatory elements and characterized their functional activity in human and mouse cell lines. Overall, ChIP-DIP generates context-specific protein localization maps at consortium scale within any molecular biology laboratory and experimental system.
Coronary artery disease (CAD) exists on a spectrum of disease represented by a combination of risk factors and pathogenic processes. An in silico score for CAD built using machine learning and clinical data in electronic health records captures disease progression, severity and underdiagnosis on this spectrum and could enhance genetic discovery efforts for CAD. Here we tested associations of rare and ultrarare coding variants with the in silico score for CAD in the UK Biobank, All of Us Research Program and BioMe Biobank. We identified associations in 17 genes; of these, 14 show at least moderate levels of prior genetic, biological and/or clinical support for CAD. We also observed an excess of ultrarare coding variants in 321 aggregated CAD genes, suggesting more ultrarare variant associations await discovery. These results expand our understanding of the genetic etiology of CAD and illustrate how digital markers can enhance genetic association investigations for complex diseases.
Chromatin modifications are linked with regulating patterns of gene expression, but their causal role and context-dependent impact on transcription remains unresolved. Here we develop a modular epigenome editing platform that programs nine key chromatin modifications, or combinations thereof, to precise loci in living cells. We couple this with single-cell readouts to systematically quantitate the magnitude and heterogeneity of transcriptional responses elicited by each specific chromatin modification. Among these, we show that installing histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) at promoters can causally instruct transcription by hierarchically remodeling the chromatin landscape. We further dissect how DNA sequence motifs influence the transcriptional impact of chromatin marks, identifying switch-like and attenuative effects within distinct cis contexts. Finally, we examine the interplay of combinatorial modifications, revealing that co-targeted H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and H2AK119 monoubiquitination (H2AK119ub) maximizes silencing penetrance across single cells. Our precision-perturbation strategy unveils the causal principles of how chromatin modification(s) influence transcription and dissects how quantitative responses are calibrated by contextual interactions.
To regulate expression, enhancers must come in proximity to their target gene. However, the relationship between the timing of enhancer-promoter (E-P) proximity and activity remains unclear, with examples of uncoupled, anticorrelated and correlated interactions. To assess this, we selected 600 characterized enhancers or promoters with tissue-specific activity in Drosophila embryos and performed Capture-C in FACS-purified myogenic or neurogenic cells during specification and tissue differentiation. This enabled direct comparison between E-P proximity and activity transitioning from OFF-to-ON and ON-to-OFF states across developmental conditions. This showed remarkably similar E-P topologies between specified muscle and neuronal cells, which are uncoupled from activity. During tissue differentiation, many new distal interactions emerge where changes in E-P proximity reflect changes in activity. The mode of E-P regulation therefore appears to change as embryogenesis proceeds, from largely permissive topologies during cell-fate specification to more instructive regulation during terminal tissue differentiation, when E-P proximity is coupled to activation.
Here, in a multi-ancestry genome-wide association study meta-analysis of kidney cancer (29,020 cases and 835,670 controls), we identified 63 susceptibility regions (50 novel) containing 108 independent risk loci. In analyses stratified by subtype, 52 regions (78 loci) were associated with clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and 6 regions (7 loci) with papillary RCC. Notably, we report a variant common in African ancestry individuals (rs7629500) in the 3' untranslated region of VHL, nearly tripling clear cell RCC risk (odds ratio 2.72, 95% confidence interval 2.23-3.30). In cis-expression quantitative trait locus analyses, 48 variants from 34 regions point toward 83 candidate genes. Enrichment of hypoxia-inducible factor-binding sites underscores the importance of hypoxia-related mechanisms in kidney cancer. Our results advance understanding of the genetic architecture of kidney cancer, provide clues for functional investigation and enable generation of a validated polygenic risk score with an estimated area under the curve of 0.65 (0.74 including risk factors) among European ancestry individuals.
Disruption of the class I human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules has important implications for immune evasion and tumor evolution. We developed major histocompatibility complex loss of heterozygosity (LOH), allele-specific mutation and measurement of expression and repression (MHC Hammer). We identified extensive variability in HLA allelic expression and pervasive HLA alternative splicing in normal lung and breast tissue. In lung TRACERx and lung and breast TCGA cohorts, 61% of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), 76% of lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) and 35% of estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) cancers harbored class I HLA transcriptional repression, while HLA tumor-enriched alternative splicing occurred in 31%, 11% and 15% of LUAD, LUSC and ER+ cancers. Consistent with the importance of HLA dysfunction in tumor evolution, in LUADs, HLA LOH was associated with metastasis and LUAD primary tumor regions seeding a metastasis had a lower effective neoantigen burden than non-seeding regions. These data highlight the extent and importance of HLA transcriptomic disruption, including repression and alternative splicing in cancer evolution.
Many drug discovery projects are started but few progress fully through clinical trials to approval. Previous work has shown that human genetics support for the therapeutic hypothesis increases the chance of trial progression. Here, we applied natural language processing to classify the free-text reasons for 28,561 clinical trials that stopped before their endpoints were met. We then evaluated these classes in light of the underlying evidence for the therapeutic hypothesis and target properties. We found that trials are more likely to stop because of a lack of efficacy in the absence of strong genetic evidence from human populations or genetically modified animal models. Furthermore, certain trials are more likely to stop for safety reasons if the drug target gene is highly constrained in human populations and if the gene is broadly expressed across tissues. These results support the growing use of human genetics to evaluate targets for drug discovery programs.
Here we use single-cell RNA sequencing to compile a human breast cell atlas assembled from 55 donors that had undergone reduction mammoplasties or risk reduction mastectomies. From more than 800,000 cells we identified 41 cell subclusters across the epithelial, immune and stromal compartments. The contribution of these different clusters varied according to the natural history of the tissue. Age, parity and germline mutations, known to modulate the risk of developing breast cancer, affected the homeostatic cellular state of the breast in different ways. We found that immune cells from BRCA1 or BRCA2 carriers had a distinct gene expression signature indicative of potential immune exhaustion, which was validated by immunohistochemistry. This suggests that immune-escape mechanisms could manifest in non-cancerous tissues very early during tumor initiation. This atlas is a rich resource that can be used to inform novel approaches for early detection and prevention of breast cancer.
In the current genomic revolution, the infancy life stage is the most neglected. Although clinical genetics recognizes the value of early identification in infancy of rare genetic causes of disorders and delay, common genetic variation is almost completely ignored in research on infant behavioral and neurodevelopmental traits. In this Perspective, we argue for a much-needed surge in research on common genetic variation influencing infant neurodevelopment and behavior, findings that would be relevant for all children. We now see convincing evidence from different research designs to suggest that developmental milestones, skills and behaviors of infants are heritable and thus are suitable candidates for gene-discovery research. We highlight the resources available to the field, including genotyped infant cohorts, and we outline, with recommendations, special considerations needed for infant data. Therefore, infant genetic research has the potential to impact basic science and to affect educational policy, public health and clinical practice.
Disease risk alleles influence the composition of cells present in the body, but modeling genetic effects on the cell states revealed by single-cell profiling is difficult because variant-associated states may reflect diverse combinations of the profiled cell features that are challenging to predefine. We introduce Genotype-Neighborhood Associations (GeNA), a statistical tool to identify cell-state abundance quantitative trait loci (csaQTLs) in high-dimensional single-cell datasets. Instead of testing associations to predefined cell states, GeNA flexibly identifies the cell states whose abundance is most associated with genetic variants. In a genome-wide survey of single-cell RNA sequencing peripheral blood profiling from 969 individuals, GeNA identifies five independent loci associated with shifts in the relative abundance of immune cell states. For example, rs3003-T (P = 1.96 x 10-11) associates with increased abundance of natural killer cells expressing tumor necrosis factor response programs. This csaQTL colocalizes with increased risk for psoriasis, an autoimmune disease that responds to anti-tumor necrosis factor treatments. Flexibly characterizing csaQTLs for granular cell states may help illuminate how genetic background alters cellular composition to confer disease risk.
CRISPR base editing screens enable analysis of disease-associated variants at scale; however, variable efficiency and precision confounds the assessment of variant-induced phenotypes. Here, we provide an integrated experimental and computational pipeline that improves estimation of variant effects in base editing screens. We use a reporter construct to measure guide RNA (gRNA) editing outcomes alongside their phenotypic consequences and introduce base editor screen analysis with activity normalization (BEAN), a Bayesian network that uses per-guide editing outcomes provided by the reporter and target site chromatin accessibility to estimate variant impacts. BEAN outperforms existing tools in variant effect quantification. We use BEAN to pinpoint common regulatory variants that alter low-density lipoprotein (LDL) uptake, implicating previously unreported genes. Additionally, through saturation base editing of LDLR, we accurately quantify missense variant pathogenicity that is consistent with measurements in UK Biobank patients and identify underlying structural mechanisms. This work provides a widely applicable approach to improve the power of base editing screens for disease-associated variant characterization.
Translating genome-wide association study (GWAS) loci into causal variants and genes requires accurate cell-type-specific enhancer-gene maps from disease-relevant tissues. Building enhancer-gene maps is essential but challenging with current experimental methods in primary human tissues. Here we developed a nonparametric statistical method, SCENT (single-cell enhancer target gene mapping), that models association between enhancer chromatin accessibility and gene expression in single-cell or nucleus multimodal RNA sequencing and ATAC sequencing data. We applied SCENT to 9 multimodal datasets including >120,000 single cells or nuclei and created 23 cell-type-specific enhancer-gene maps. These maps were highly enriched for causal variants in expression quantitative loci and GWAS for 1,143 diseases and traits. We identified likely causal genes for both common and rare diseases and linked somatic mutation hotspots to target genes. We demonstrate that application of SCENT to multimodal data from disease-relevant human tissue enables the scalable construction of accurate cell-type-specific enhancer-gene maps, essential for defining noncoding variant function.
Coffea arabica, an allotetraploid hybrid of Coffea eugenioides and Coffea canephora, is the source of approximately 60% of coffee products worldwide, and its cultivated accessions have undergone several population bottlenecks. We present chromosome-level assemblies of a di-haploid C. arabica accession and modern representatives of its diploid progenitors, C. eugenioides and C. canephora. The three species exhibit largely conserved genome structures between diploid parents and descendant subgenomes, with no obvious global subgenome dominance. We find evidence for a founding polyploidy event 350,000-610,000 years ago, followed by several pre-domestication bottlenecks, resulting in narrow genetic variation. A split between wild accessions and cultivar progenitors occurred similar to 30.5 thousand years ago, followed by a period of migration between the two populations. Analysis of modern varieties, including lines historically introgressed with C. canephora, highlights their breeding histories and loci that may contribute to pathogen resistance, laying the groundwork for future genomics-based breeding of C. arabica.
Single-cell sequencing has characterized cell state heterogeneity across diverse healthy and malignant tissues. However, the plasticity or heritability of these cell states remains largely unknown. To address this, we introduce PATH (phylogenetic analysis of trait heritability), a framework to quantify cell state heritability versus plasticity and infer cell state transition and proliferation dynamics from single-cell lineage tracing data. Applying PATH to a mouse model of pancreatic cancer, we observed heritability at the ends of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition spectrum, with higher plasticity at more intermediate states. In primary glioblastoma, we identified bidirectional transitions between stem- and mesenchymal-like cells, which use the astrocyte-like state as an intermediary. Finally, we reconstructed a phylogeny from single-cell whole-genome sequencing in B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and delineated the heritability of B cell differentiation states linked with genetic drivers. Altogether, PATH replaces qualitative conceptions of plasticity with quantitative measures, offering a framework to study somatic evolution.
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) affects up to 10% of older adults. Their healthcare is impeded by delayed diagnosis and insufficient treatment. To advance disease prediction and find new entry points for therapy, we performed meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies in 116,647 individuals with RLS (cases) and 1,546,466 controls of European ancestry. The pooled analysis increased the number of risk loci eightfold to 164, including three on chromosome X. Sex-specific meta-analyses revealed largely overlapping genetic predispositions of the sexes (r g = 0.96). Locus annotation prioritized druggable genes such as glutamate receptors 1 and 4, and Mendelian randomization indicated RLS as a causal risk factor for diabetes. Machine learning approaches combining genetic and nongenetic information performed best in risk prediction (area under the curve (AUC) = 0.82-0.91). In summary, we identified targets for drug development and repurposing, prioritized potential causal relationships between RLS and relevant comorbidities and risk factors for follow-up and provided evidence that nonlinear interactions are likely relevant to RLS risk prediction.
Aneuploidy, an abnormal chromosome composition, is a major contributor to cancer development and progression and an important determinant of cancer therapeutic responses and clinical outcomes. Despite being recognized as a hallmark of human cancer, the exact role of aneuploidy as a 'driver' of cancer is still largely unknown. Identifying the specific genetic elements that underlie the recurrence of common aneuploidies remains a major challenge of cancer genetics. In this Review, we discuss recurrent aneuploidies and their function as drivers of tumor development. We then delve into the context-dependent identification and functional characterization of the driver genes underlying driver aneuploidies and examine emerging strategies to uncover these driver genes using cancer genomics data and cancer models. Lastly, we explore opportunities for targeting driver aneuploidies in cancer by leveraging the functional consequences of these common genetic alterations.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified >80 Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD)-associated genetic loci. However, the clinical outcomes used in most previous studies belie the complex nature of underlying neuropathologies. Here we performed GWAS on 11 ADRD-related neuropathology endophenotypes with participants drawn from the following three sources: the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, the Religious Orders Study and Rush Memory and Aging Project, and the Adult Changes in Thought study (n = 7,804 total autopsied participants). We identified eight independent significantly associated loci, of which four were new (COL4A1, PIK3R5, LZTS1 and APOC2). Separately testing known ADRD loci, 19 loci were significantly associated with at least one neuropathology after false-discovery rate adjustment. Genetic colocalization analyses identified pleiotropic effects and quantitative trait loci. Methylation in the cerebral cortex at two sites near APOC2 was associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Studies that include neuropathology endophenotypes are an important step in understanding the mechanisms underlying genetic ADRD risk.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified >80 Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD)-associated genetic loci. However, the clinical outcomes used in most previous studies belie the complex nature of underlying neuropathologies. Here we performed GWAS on 11 ADRD-related neuropathology endophenotypes with participants drawn from the following three sources: the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, the Religious Orders Study and Rush Memory and Aging Project, and the Adult Changes in Thought study (n = 7,804 total autopsied participants). We identified eight independent significantly associated loci, of which four were new (COL4A1, PIK3R5, LZTS1 and APOC2). Separately testing known ADRD loci, 19 loci were significantly associated with at least one neuropathology after false-discovery rate adjustment. Genetic colocalization analyses identified pleiotropic effects and quantitative trait loci. Methylation in the cerebral cortex at two sites near APOC2 was associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Studies that include neuropathology endophenotypes are an important step in understanding the mechanisms underlying genetic ADRD risk.
The African BioGenome Project (AfricaBP) Open Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics aims to overcome barriers to capacity building through its distributed African regional workshops and prioritizes the exchange of grassroots knowledge and innovation in biodiversity genomics and bioinformatics. In 2023, we implemented 28 workshops on biodiversity genomics and bioinformatics, covering 11 African countries across the 5 African geographical regions. These regional workshops trained 408 African scientists in hands-on molecular biology, genomics and bioinformatics techniques as well as the ethical, legal and social issues associated with acquiring genetic resources. Here, we discuss the implementation of transformative strategies, such as expanding the regional workshop model of AfricaBP to involve multiple countries, institutions and partners, including the proposed creation of an African digital database with sequence information relating to both biodiversity and agriculture. This will ultimately help create a critical mass of skilled genomics and bioinformatics scientists across Africa.
We built a reference panel with 342 million autosomal variants using 78,195 individuals from the Genomics England (GEL) dataset, achieving a phasing switch error rate of 0.18% for European samples and imputation quality of r(2) = 0.75 for variants with minor allele frequencies as low as 2 x 10(-4) in white British samples. The GEL-imputed UK Biobank genome-wide association analysis identified 70% of associations found by direct exome sequencing (P < 2.18 x 10(-11)), while extending testing of rare variants to the entire genome. Coding variants dominated the rare-variant genome-wide association results, implying less disruptive effects of rare non-coding variants.
In combination with cell-intrinsic properties, interactions in the tumor microenvironment modulate therapeutic response. We leveraged single-cell spatial transcriptomics to dissect the remodeling of multicellular neighborhoods and cell-cell interactions in human pancreatic cancer associated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy. We developed spatially constrained optimal transport interaction analysis (SCOTIA), an optimal transport model with a cost function that includes both spatial distance and ligand-receptor gene expression. Our results uncovered a marked change in ligand-receptor interactions between cancer-associated fibroblasts and malignant cells in response to treatment, which was supported by orthogonal datasets, including an ex vivo tumoroid coculture system. We identified enrichment in interleukin-6 family signaling that functionally confers resistance to chemotherapy. Overall, this study demonstrates that characterization of the tumor microenvironment using single-cell spatial transcriptomics allows for the identification of molecular interactions that may play a role in the emergence of therapeutic resistance and offers a spatially based analysis framework that can be broadly applied to other contexts.
Linkage studies have successfully mapped loci underlying monogenic disorders, but mostly failed when applied to common diseases. Conversely, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified replicable associations between thousands of SNPs and complex traits, yet capture less than half of the total heritability. In the present study we reconcile these two approaches by showing that linkage signals of height and body mass index (BMI) from 119,000 sibling pairs colocalize with GWAS-identified loci. Concordant with polygenicity, we observed the following: a genome-wide inflation of linkage test statistics; that GWAS results predict linkage signals; and that adjusting phenotypes for polygenic scores reduces linkage signals. Finally, we developed a method using recombination rate-stratified, identity-by-descent sharing between siblings to unbiasedly estimate heritability of height (0.76 +/- 0.05) and BMI (0.55 +/- 0.07). Our results imply that substantial heritability remains unaccounted for by GWAS-identified loci and this residual genetic variation is polygenic and enriched near these loci.
Spatial omics data are clustered to define both cell types and tissue domains. We present Building Aggregates with a Neighborhood Kernel and Spatial Yardstick (BANKSY), an algorithm that unifies these two spatial clustering problems by embedding cells in a product space of their own and the local neighborhood transcriptome, representing cell state and microenvironment, respectively. BANKSY's spatial feature augmentation strategy improved performance on both tasks when tested on diverse RNA (imaging, sequencing) and protein (imaging) datasets. BANKSY revealed unexpected niche-dependent cell states in the mouse brain and outperformed competing methods on domain segmentation and cell typing benchmarks. BANKSY can also be used for quality control of spatial transcriptomics data and for spatially aware batch effect correction. Importantly, it is substantially faster and more scalable than existing methods, enabling the processing of millions of cell datasets. In summary, BANKSY provides an accurate, biologically motivated, scalable and versatile framework for analyzing spatially resolved omics data.
Multiple myeloma is a treatable, but currently incurable, hematological malignancy of plasma cells characterized by diverse and complex tumor genetics for which precision medicine approaches to treatment are lacking. The Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation's Relating Clinical Outcomes in Multiple Myeloma to Personal Assessment of Genetic Profile study (NCT01454297) is a longitudinal, observational clinical study of newly diagnosed patients with multiple myeloma (n = 1,143) where tumor samples are characterized using whole-genome sequencing, whole-exome sequencing and RNA sequencing at diagnosis and progression, and clinical data are collected every 3 months. Analyses of the baseline cohort identified genes that are the target of recurrent gain-of-function and loss-of-function events. Consensus clustering identified 8 and 12 unique copy number and expression subtypes of myeloma, respectively, identifying high-risk genetic subtypes and elucidating many of the molecular underpinnings of these unique biological groups. Analysis of serial samples showed that 25.5% of patients transition to a high-risk expression subtype at progression. We observed robust expression of immunotherapy targets in this subtype, suggesting a potential therapeutic option.
Gene promoter and enhancer sequences are bound by transcription factors and are depleted of methylated CpG sites (cytosines preceding guanines in DNA). The absence of methylated CpGs in these sequences typically correlates with increased gene expression, indicating a regulatory role for methylation. We used nanopore sequencing to determine haplotype-specific methylation rates of 15.3 million CpG units in 7,179 whole-blood genomes. We identified 189,178 methylation depleted sequences where three or more proximal CpGs were unmethylated on at least one haplotype. A total of 77,789 methylation depleted sequences (similar to 41%) associated with 80,503 cis-acting sequence variants, which we termed allele-specific methylation quantitative trait loci (ASM-QTLs). RNA sequencing of 896 samples from the same blood draws used to perform nanopore sequencing showed that the ASM-QTL, that is, DNA sequence variability, drives most of the correlation found between gene expression and CpG methylation. ASM-QTLs were enriched 40.2-fold (95% confidence interval 32.2, 49.9) among sequence variants associating with hematological traits, demonstrating that ASM-QTLs are important functional units in the noncoding genome.
The human brain undergoes protracted postnatal maturation, guided by dynamic changes in gene expression. Most studies exploring these processes have used bulk tissue analyses, which mask cell-type-specific gene expression dynamics. Here, using single-nucleus RNA sequencing on temporal lobe tissue, including samples of African ancestry, we build a joint pediatric and adult atlas of 75 cell subtypes, which we verify with spatial transcriptomics. We explore the differences between pediatric and adult cell subtypes, revealing the genes and pathways that change during brain maturation. Our results highlight excitatory neuron subtypes, including the LTK and FREM subtypes, that show elevated expression of genes associated with cognition and synaptic plasticity in pediatric tissue. The resources we present here improve our understanding of the brain during its development and contribute to global efforts to build an inclusive brain cell map.
Genomic profiles and prognostic biomarkers in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) from ancestry-diverse populations are underexplored. We analyzed the exomes and transcriptomes of 100 patients with AML with genomically confirmed African ancestry (Black; Alliance) and compared their somatic mutation frequencies with those of 323 self-reported white patients with AML, 55% of whom had genomically confirmed European ancestry (white; BeatAML). Here we find that 73% of 162 gene mutations recurrent in Black patients, including a hitherto unreported PHIP alteration detected in 7% of patients, were found in one white patient or not detected. Black patients with myelodysplasia-related AML were younger than white patients suggesting intrinsic and/or extrinsic dysplasia-causing stressors. On multivariable analyses of Black patients, NPM1 and NRAS mutations were associated with inferior disease-free and IDH1 and IDH2 mutations with reduced overall survival. Inflammatory profiles, cell type distributions and transcriptional profiles differed between Black and white patients with NPM1 mutations. Incorporation of ancestry-specific risk markers into the 2022 European LeukemiaNet genetic risk stratification changed risk group assignment for one-third of Black patients and improved their outcome prediction.
Functional genomic screens in two-dimensional cell culture models are limited in identifying therapeutic targets that influence the tumor microenvironment. By comparing targeted CRISPR-Cas9 screens in a two-dimensional culture with xenografts derived from the same cell line, we identified MEN1 as the top hit that confers differential dropout effects in vitro and in vivo. MEN1 knockout in multiple solid cancer types does not impact cell proliferation in vitro but significantly promotes or inhibits tumor growth in immunodeficient or immunocompetent mice, respectively. Mechanistically, MEN1 knockout redistributes MLL1 chromatin occupancy, increasing H3K4me3 at repetitive genomic regions, activating double-stranded RNA expression and increasing neutrophil and CD8+ T cell infiltration in immunodeficient and immunocompetent mice, respectively. Pharmacological inhibition of the menin-MLL interaction reduces tumor growth in a CD8+ T cell-dependent manner. These findings reveal tumor microenvironment-dependent oncogenic and tumor-suppressive functions of MEN1 and provide a rationale for targeting MEN1 in solid cancers.
Transcription factor (TF) DNA-binding dynamics govern cell fate and identity. However, our ability to pharmacologically control TF localization is limited. Here we leverage chemically driven binding site restriction leading to robust and DNA-sequence-specific redistribution of PU.1, a pioneer TF pertinent to many hematopoietic malignancies. Through an innovative technique, 'CLICK-on-CUT&Tag', we characterize the hierarchy of de novo PU.1 motifs, predicting occupancy in the PU.1 cistrome under binding site restriction. Temporal and single-molecule studies of binding site restriction uncover the pioneering dynamics of native PU.1 and identify the paradoxical activation of an alternate target gene set driven by PU.1 localization to second-tier binding sites. These transcriptional changes were corroborated by genetic blockade and site-specific reporter assays. Binding site restriction and subsequent PU.1 network rewiring causes primary human leukemia cells to differentiate. In summary, pharmacologically induced TF redistribution can be harnessed to govern TF localization, actuate alternate gene networks and direct cell fate.
The Farm Animal Genotype-Tissue Expression (FarmGTEx) project has been established to develop a public resource of genetic regulatory variants in livestock, which is essential for linking genetic polymorphisms to variation in phenotypes, helping fundamental biological discovery and exploitation in animal breeding and human biomedicine. Here we show results from the pilot phase of PigGTEx by processing 5,457 RNA-sequencing and 1,602 whole-genome sequencing samples passing quality control from pigs. We build a pig genotype imputation panel and associate millions of genetic variants with five types of transcriptomic phenotypes in 34 tissues. We evaluate tissue specificity of regulatory effects and elucidate molecular mechanisms of their action using multi-omics data. Leveraging this resource, we decipher regulatory mechanisms underlying 207 pig complex phenotypes and demonstrate the similarity of pigs to humans in gene expression and the genetic regulation behind complex phenotypes, supporting the importance of pigs as a human biomedical model.
Alternative splicing contributes to complex traits, but whether this differs in trait-relevant cell types across diverse genetic ancestries is unclear. Here we describe cell-type-specific, sex-biased and ancestry-biased alternative splicing in similar to 1 M peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 474 healthy donors from the Asian Immune Diversity Atlas. We identify widespread sex-biased and ancestry-biased differential splicing, most of which is cell-type-specific. We identify 11,577 independent cis-splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTLs), 607 trans-sGenes and 107 dynamic sQTLs. Colocalization between cis-eQTLs and trans-sQTLs revealed a cell-type-specific regulatory relationship between HNRNPLL and PTPRC. We observed an enrichment of cis-sQTL effects in autoimmune and inflammatory disease heritability. Specifically, we functionally validated an Asian-specific sQTL disrupting the 5 ' splice site of TCHP exon 4 that putatively modulates the risk of Graves' disease in East Asian populations. Our work highlights the impact of ancestral diversity on splicing and provides a roadmap to dissect its role in complex diseases at single-cell resolution.
Premature termination codons (PTCs) cause similar to 10-20% of inherited diseases and are a major mechanism of tumor suppressor gene inactivation in cancer. A general strategy to alleviate the effects of PTCs would be to promote translational readthrough. Nonsense suppression by small molecules has proven effective in diverse disease models, but translation into the clinic is hampered by ineffective readthrough of many PTCs. Here we directly tackle the challenge of defining drug efficacy by quantifying the readthrough of similar to 5,800 human pathogenic stop codons by eight drugs. We find that different drugs promote the readthrough of complementary subsets of PTCs defined by local sequence context. This allows us to build interpretable models that accurately predict drug-induced readthrough genome-wide, and we validate these models by quantifying endogenous stop codon readthrough. Accurate readthrough quantification and prediction will empower clinical trial design and the development of personalized nonsense suppression therapies.
C-to-T transitions in CpG dinucleotides are the most prevalent mutations in human cancers and genetic diseases. These mutations have been attributed to deamination of 5-methylcytosine (5mC), an epigenetic modification found on CpGs. We recently linked CpG>TpG mutations to replication and hypothesized that errors introduced by polymerase epsilon (Pol epsilon) may represent an alternative source of mutations. Here we present a new method called polymerase error rate sequencing (PER-seq) to measure the error spectrum of DNA polymerases in isolation. We find that the most common human cancer-associated Pol epsilon mutant (P286R) produces an excess of CpG>TpG errors, phenocopying the mutation spectrum of tumors carrying this mutation and deficiencies in mismatch repair. Notably, we also discover that wild-type Pol epsilon has a sevenfold higher error rate when replicating 5mCpG compared to C in other contexts. Together, our results from PER-seq and human cancers demonstrate that replication errors are a major contributor to CpG>TpG mutagenesis in replicating cells, fundamentally changing our understanding of this important disease-causing mutational mechanism.
The rise of large-scale, sequence-based deep neural networks (DNNs) for predicting gene expression has introduced challenges in their evaluation and interpretation. Current evaluations align DNN predictions with orthogonal experimental data, providing insights into generalization but offering limited insights into their decision-making process. Existing model explainability tools focus mainly on motif analysis, which becomes complex when interpreting longer sequences. Here we present cis-regulatory element model explanations (CREME), an in silico perturbation toolkit that interprets the rules of gene regulation learned by a genomic DNN. Applying CREME to Enformer, a state-of-the-art DNN, we identify cis-regulatory elements that enhance or silence gene expression and characterize their complex interactions. CREME can provide interpretations across multiple scales of genomic organization, from cis-regulatory elements to fine-mapped functional sequence elements within them, offering high-resolution insights into the regulatory architecture of the genome. CREME provides a powerful toolkit for translating the predictions of genomic DNNs into mechanistic insights of gene regulation.
In digenic inheritance, pathogenic variants in two genes must be inherited together to cause disease. Only very few examples of digenic inheritance have been described in the neuromuscular disease field. Here we show that predicted deleterious variants in SRPK3, encoding the X-linked serine/argenine protein kinase 3, lead to a progressive early onset skeletal muscle myopathy only when in combination with heterozygous variants in the TTN gene. The co-occurrence of predicted deleterious SRPK3/TTN variants was not seen among 76,702 healthy male individuals, and statistical modeling strongly supported digenic inheritance as the best-fitting model. Furthermore, double-mutant zebrafish (srpk3-/-; ttn.1+/-) replicated the myopathic phenotype and showed myofibrillar disorganization. Transcriptome data suggest that the interaction of srpk3 and ttn.1 in zebrafish occurs at a post-transcriptional level. We propose that digenic inheritance of deleterious changes impacting both the protein kinase SRPK3 and the giant muscle protein titin causes a skeletal myopathy and might serve as a model for other genetic diseases.
Recent studies on pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (pAML) have revealed pediatric-specific driver alterations, many of which are underrepresented in the current classification schemas. To comprehensively define the genomic landscape of pAML, we systematically categorized 887 pAML into 23 mutually distinct molecular categories, including new major entities such as UBTF or BCL11B, covering 91.4% of the cohort. These molecular categories were associated with unique expression profiles and mutational patterns. For instance, molecular categories characterized by specific HOXA or HOXB expression signatures showed distinct mutation patterns of RAS pathway genes, FLT3 or WT1, suggesting shared biological mechanisms. We show that molecular categories were strongly associated with clinical outcomes using two independent cohorts, leading to the establishment of a new prognostic framework for pAML based on these updated molecular categories and minimal residual disease. Together, this comprehensive diagnostic and prognostic framework forms the basis for future classification of pAML and treatment strategies.
Only a subset of patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors (CPIs) respond to the treatment, and distinguishing responders from non-responders is a major challenge. Many proposed biomarkers of CPI response and survival probably represent alternative measurements of the same aspects of the tumor, its microenvironment or the host. Thus, we currently ignore how many truly independent biomarkers there are. With an unbiased analysis of genomics, transcriptomics and clinical data of a cohort of patients with metastatic tumors (n = 479), we discovered five orthogonal latent factors: tumor mutation burden, T cell effective infiltration, transforming growth factor-beta activity in the microenvironment, prior treatment and tumor proliferative potential. Their association with CPI response and survival was observed across all tumor types and validated across six independent cohorts (n = 1,491). These five latent factors constitute a frame of reference to organize current and future knowledge on biomarkers of CPI response and survival.
In mice, exit from the totipotent two-cell (2C) stage embryo requires silencing of the 2C-associated transcriptional program. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in this process remain poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that the 2C-specific transcription factor double homeobox protein (DUX) mediates an essential negative feedback loop by inducing the expression of DUXBL to promote this silencing. We show that DUXBL gains accessibility to DUX-bound regions specifically upon DUX expression. Furthermore, we determine that DUXBL interacts with TRIM24 and TRIM33, members of the TRIM superfamily involved in gene silencing, and colocalizes with them in nuclear foci upon DUX expression. Importantly, DUXBL overexpression impairs 2C-associated transcription, whereas Duxbl inactivation in mouse embryonic stem cells increases DUX-dependent induction of the 2C-transcriptional program. Consequently, DUXBL deficiency in embryos results in sustained expression of 2C-associated transcripts leading to early developmental arrest. Our study identifies DUXBL as an essential regulator of totipotency exit enabling the first divergence of cell fates.
According to conventional views, colon cancer originates from stem cells. However, inflammation, a key risk factor for colon cancer, has been shown to suppress intestinal stemness. Here, we used Paneth cells as a model to assess the capacity of differentiated lineages to trigger tumorigenesis in the context of inflammation in mice. Upon inflammation, Paneth cell-specific Apc mutations led to intestinal tumors reminiscent not only of those arising in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, but also of a larger fraction of human sporadic colon cancers. The latter is possibly because of the inflammatory consequences of western-style dietary habits, a major colon cancer risk factor. Machine learning methods designed to predict the cell-of-origin of cancer from patient-derived tumor samples confirmed that, in a substantial fraction of sporadic cases, the origins of colon cancer reside in secretory lineages and not in stem cells.
Much of what we know about eukaryotic transcription stems from animals and yeast; however, plants evolved separately for over a billion years, leaving ample time for divergence in transcriptional regulation. Here we set out to elucidate fundamental properties of cis-regulatory sequences in plants. Using massively parallel reporter assays across four plant species, we demonstrate the central role of sequences downstream of the transcription start site (TSS) in transcriptional regulation. Unlike animal enhancers that are position independent, plant regulatory elements depend on their position, as altering their location relative to the TSS significantly affects transcription. We highlight the importance of the region downstream of the TSS in regulating transcription by identifying a DNA motif that is conserved across vascular plants and is sufficient to enhance gene expression in a dose-dependent manner. The identification of a large number of position-dependent enhancers points to fundamental differences in gene regulation between plants and animals.
Salmonella enterica is comprised of genetically distinct 'serovars' that together provide an intriguing model for exploring the genetic basis of pathogen evolution. Although the genomes of numerous Salmonella isolates with broad variations in host range and human disease manifestations have been sequenced, the functional links between genetic and phenotypic differences among these serovars remain poorly understood. Here, we conduct high-throughput functional genomics on both generalist (Typhimurium) and human-restricted (Typhi and Paratyphi A) Salmonella at unprecedented scale in the study of this enteric pathogen. Using a comprehensive systems biology approach, we identify gene networks with serovar-specific fitness effects across 25 host-associated stresses encountered at key stages of human infection. By experimentally perturbing these networks, we characterize previously undescribed pseudogenes in human-adapted Salmonella. Overall, this work highlights specific vulnerabilities encoded within human-restricted Salmonella that are linked to the degradation of their genomes, shedding light into the evolution of this enteric pathogen.
Brain metabolism perturbation can contribute to traits and diseases. We conducted a genome-wide association study for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain metabolite levels, identifying 205 independent associations (47.3% new signals, containing 11 new loci) for 139 CSF metabolites, and 32 independent associations (43.8% new signals, containing 4 new loci) for 31 brain metabolites. Of these, 96.9% (CSF) and 71.4% (brain) of the new signals belonged to previously analyzed metabolites in blood or urine. We integrated the metabolite quantitative trait loci (MQTLs) with 23 neurological, psychiatric and common human traits and diseases through colocalization to identify metabolites and biological processes implicated in these phenotypes. Combining CSF and brain, we identified 71 metabolite-trait associations, such as glycerophosphocholines with Alzheimer's disease, O-sulfo-l-tyrosine with Parkinson's disease, glycine, xanthine with waist-to-hip ratio and ergothioneine with inflammatory bowel disease. Our study expanded the knowledge of MQTLs in the central nervous system, providing insights into human traits.
Na+ exclusion from above-ground tissues via the Na+-selective transporter HKT1;5 is a major salt-tolerance mechanism in crops. Using the expression genome-wide association study and yeast-one-hybrid screening, we identified TaSPL6-D, a transcriptional suppressor of TaHKT1;5-D in bread wheat. SPL6 also targeted HKT1;5 in rice and Brachypodium. A 47-bp insertion in the first exon of TaSPL6-D resulted in a truncated peptide, TaSPL6-D-In, disrupting TaHKT1;5-D repression exhibited by TaSPL6-D-Del. Overexpressing TaSPL6-D-Del, but not TaSPL6-D-In, led to inhibited TaHKT1;5-D expression and increased salt sensitivity. Knockout of TaSPL6-D-Del in two wheat genotypes enhanced salinity tolerance, which was attenuated by a further TaHKT1;5-D knockdown. Spike development was preserved in Taspl6-dd mutants but not in Taspl6-aabbdd mutants. TaSPL6-D-In was mainly present in landraces, and molecular-assisted introduction of TaSPL6-D-In from a landrace into a leading wheat cultivar successfully improved yield on saline soils. The SPL6-HKT1;5 module offers a target for the molecular breeding of salt-tolerant crops.
The human placenta has a vital role in ensuring a successful pregnancy. Despite the growing body of knowledge about its cellular compositions and functions, there has been limited research on the heterogeneity of the billions of nuclei within the syncytiotrophoblast (STB), a multinucleated entity primarily responsible for placental function. Here we conducted integrated single-nucleus RNA sequencing and single-nucleus ATAC sequencing analyses of human placentas from early and late pregnancy. Our findings demonstrate the dynamic heterogeneity and developmental trajectories of STB nuclei and their correspondence with human trophoblast stem cell (hTSC)-derived STB. Furthermore, we identified transcription factors associated with diverse STB nuclear lineages through their gene regulatory networks and experimentally confirmed their function in hTSC and trophoblast organoid-derived STBs. Together, our data provide insights into the heterogeneity of human STB and represent a valuable resource for interpreting associated pregnancy complications.
Studying the genetic regulation of protein expression (through protein quantitative trait loci (pQTLs)) offers a deeper understanding of regulatory variants uncharacterized by mRNA expression regulation (expression QTLs (eQTLs)) studies. Here we report cis-eQTL and cis-pQTL statistical fine-mapping from 1,405 genotyped samples with blood mRNA and 2,932 plasma samples of protein expression, as part of the Japan COVID-19 Task Force (JCTF). Fine-mapped eQTLs (n = 3,464) were enriched for 932 variants validated with a massively parallel reporter assay. Fine-mapped pQTLs (n = 582) were enriched for missense variations on structured and extracellular domains, although the possibility of epitope-binding artifacts remains. Trans-eQTL and trans-pQTL analysis highlighted associations of class I HLA allele variation with KIR genes. We contrast the multi-tissue origin of plasma protein with blood mRNA, contributing to the limited colocalization level, distinct regulatory mechanisms and trait relevance of eQTLs and pQTLs. We report a negative correlation between ABO mRNA and protein expression because of linkage disequilibrium between distinct nearby eQTLs and pQTLs.
Aneuploidy is frequently detected in early human embryos as a major cause of early pregnancy failure. However, how aneuploidy affects cellular function remains elusive. Here, we profiled the transcriptomes of 14,908 single cells from 203 human euploid and aneuploid blastocysts involving autosomal and sex chromosomes. Nearly all of the blastocysts contained four lineages. In aneuploid chromosomes, 19.5% +/- 1.2% of the expressed genes showed a dosage effect, and 90 dosage-sensitive domains were identified. Aneuploidy leads to prevalent genome-wide transcriptome alterations. Common effects, including apoptosis, were identified, especially in monosomies, partially explaining the lower cell numbers in autosomal monosomies. We further identified lineage-specific effects causing unstable epiblast development in aneuploidies, which was accompanied by the downregulation of TGF-beta and FGF signaling, which resulted in insufficient trophectoderm maturation. Our work provides crucial insights into the molecular basis of human aneuploid blastocysts and may shed light on the cellular interaction during blastocyst development.
The origin and functionality of long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) remain poorly understood. Here, we show that multiple quantitative trait loci modulating distinct domestication traits in soybeans are pleiotropic effects of a locus composed of two tandem lncRNA genes. These lncRNA genes, each containing two inverted repeats, originating from coding sequences of the MYB genes, function in wild soybeans by generating clusters of small RNA (sRNA) species that inhibit the expression of their MYB gene relatives through post-transcriptional regulation. By contrast, the expression of lncRNA genes in cultivated soybeans is severely repressed, and, consequently, the corresponding MYB genes are highly expressed, shaping multiple distinct domestication traits as well as leafhopper resistance. The inverted repeats were formed before the divergence of the Glycine genus from the Phaseolus-Vigna lineage and exhibit strong structure-function constraints. This study exemplifies a type of target for selection during plant domestication and identifies mechanisms of lncRNA formation and action.
Many variants that we inherit from our parents or acquire de novo or somatically are rare, limiting the precision with which we can associate them with disease. We performed exhaustive saturation genome editing (SGE) of BAP1, the disruption of which is linked to tumorigenesis and altered neurodevelopment. We experimentally characterized 18,108 unique variants, of which 6,196 were found to have abnormal functions, and then used these data to evaluate phenotypic associations in the UK Biobank. We also characterized variants in a large population-ascertained tumor collection, in cancer pedigrees and ClinVar, and explored the behavior of cancer-associated variants compared to that of variants linked to neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Our analyses demonstrated that disruptive germline BAP1 variants were significantly associated with higher circulating levels of the mitogen IGF-1, suggesting a possible pathological mechanism and therapeutic target. Furthermore, we built a variant classifier with >98% sensitivity and specificity and quantify evidence strengths to aid precision variant interpretation.
Whole chromosome and arm-level copy number alterations occur at high frequencies in tumors, but their selective advantages, if any, are poorly understood. Here, utilizing unbiased whole chromosome genetic screens combined with in vitro evolution to generate arm- and subarm-level events, we iteratively selected the fittest karyotypes from aneuploidized human renal and mammary epithelial cells. Proliferation-based karyotype selection in these epithelial lines modeled tissue-specific tumor aneuploidy patterns in patient cohorts in the absence of driver mutations. Hi-C-based translocation mapping revealed that arm-level events usually emerged in multiples of two via centromeric translocations and occurred more frequently in tetraploids than diploids, contributing to the increased diversity in evolving tetraploid populations. Isogenic clonal lineages enabled elucidation of pro-tumorigenic mechanisms associated with common copy number alterations, revealing Notch signaling potentiation as a driver of 1q gain in breast cancer. We propose that intrinsic, tissue-specific proliferative effects underlie tumor copy number patterns in cancer.
Bleeding in early pregnancy and postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) bear substantial risks, with the former closely associated with pregnancy loss and the latter being the foremost cause of maternal death, underscoring the severe impact on maternal-fetal health. We identified five genetic loci linked to PPH in a meta-analysis. Functional annotation analysis indicated candidate genes HAND2, TBX3 and RAP2C/FRMD7 at three loci and showed that at each locus, associated variants were located within binding sites for progesterone receptors. There were strong genetic correlations with birth weight, gestational duration and uterine fibroids. Bleeding in early pregnancy yielded no genome-wide association signals but showed strong genetic correlation with various human traits, suggesting a potentially complex, polygenic etiology. Our results suggest that PPH is related to progesterone signaling dysregulation, whereas early bleeding is a complex trait associated with underlying health and possibly socioeconomic status and may include genetic factors that have not yet been identified.
The integration of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) with disease genome-wide association studies (GWASs) has proven successful in prioritizing candidate genes at disease-associated loci. QTL mapping has been focused on multi-tissue expression QTLs or plasma protein QTLs (pQTLs). We generated a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pQTL atlas by measuring 6,361 proteins in 3,506 samples. We identified 3,885 associations for 1,883 proteins, including 2,885 new pQTLs, demonstrating unique genetic regulation in CSF. We identified CSF-enriched pleiotropic regions on chromosome (chr)3q28 near OSTN and chr19q13.32 near APOE that were enriched for neuron specificity and neurological development. We integrated our associations with Alzheimer's disease (AD) through proteome-wide association study (PWAS), colocalization and Mendelian randomization and identified 38 putative causal proteins, 15 of which have drugs available. Finally, we developed a proteomics-based AD prediction model that outperforms genetics-based models. These findings will be instrumental to further understand the biology and identify causal and druggable proteins for brain and neurological traits.
The prevalence and nature of somatic copy number alterations (CNAs) in breast epithelium and their role in tumor initiation and evolution remain poorly understood. Using single-cell DNA sequencing (49,238 cells) of epithelium from BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers or wild-type individuals, we identified recurrent CNAs (for example, 1q-gain and 7q, 10q, 16q and 22q-loss) that are present in a rare population of cells across almost all samples (n = 28). In BRCA1/BRCA2 carriers, these occur before loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of wild-type alleles. These CNAs, common in malignant tumors, are enriched in luminal cells but absent in basal myoepithelial cells. Allele-specific analysis of prevalent CNAs reveals that they arose by independent mutational events, consistent with convergent evolution. BRCA1/BRCA2 carriers contained a small percentage of cells with extreme aneuploidy, featuring loss of TP53, BRCA1/BRCA2 LOH and multiple breast cancer-associated CNAs. Our findings suggest that CNAs arising in normal luminal breast epithelium are precursors to clonally expanded tumor genomes.
Penetrance is the probability that an individual with a pathogenic genetic variant develops a specific disease. Knowing the penetrance of variants for monogenic disorders is important for counseling of individuals. Until recently, estimates of penetrance have largely relied on affected individuals and their at-risk family members being clinically referred for genetic testing, a 'phenotype-first' approach. This approach substantially overestimates the penetrance of variants because of ascertainment bias. The recent availability of whole-genome sequencing data in individuals from very-large-scale population-based cohorts now allows 'genotype-first' estimates of penetrance for many conditions. Although this type of population-based study can underestimate penetrance owing to recruitment biases, it provides more accurate estimates of penetrance for secondary or incidental findings. Here, we provide guidance for the conduct of penetrance studies to ensure that robust genotypes and phenotypes are used to accurately estimate penetrance of variants and groups of similarly annotated variants from population-based studies.
Cholestatic liver injuries, characterized by regional damage around the bile ductular region, lack curative therapies and cause considerable mortality. Here we generated a high-definition spatiotemporal atlas of gene expression during cholestatic injury and repair in mice by integrating spatial enhanced resolution omics sequencing and single-cell transcriptomics. Spatiotemporal analyses revealed a key role of cholangiocyte-driven signaling correlating with the periportal damage-repair response. Cholangiocytes express genes related to recruitment and differentiation of lipid-associated macrophages, which generate feedback signals enhancing ductular reaction. Moreover, cholangiocytes express high TGF beta in association with the conversion of liver progenitor-like cells into cholangiocytes during injury and the dampened proliferation of periportal hepatocytes during recovery. Notably, Atoh8 restricts hepatocyte proliferation during 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydro-collidin damage and is quickly downregulated after injury withdrawal, allowing hepatocytes to respond to growth signals. Our findings lay a keystone for in-depth studies of cellular dynamics and molecular mechanisms of cholestatic injuries, which may further develop into therapies for cholangiopathies.
Excessive nitrogen promotes the formation of nonproductive tillers in rice, which decreases nitrogen use efficiency (NUE). Developing high-NUE rice cultivars through balancing nitrogen uptake and the formation of productive tillers remains a long-standing challenge, yet how these two processes are coordinated in rice remains elusive. Here we identify the transcription factor OsGATA8 as a key coordinator of nitrogen uptake and tiller formation in rice. OsGATA8 negatively regulates nitrogen uptake by repressing transcription of the ammonium transporter gene OsAMT3.2. Meanwhile, it promotes tiller formation by repressing the transcription of OsTCP19, a negative modulator of tillering. We identify OsGATA8-H as a high-NUE haplotype with enhanced nitrogen uptake and a higher proportion of productive tillers. The geographical distribution of OsGATA8-H and its frequency change in historical accessions suggest its adaption to the fertile soil. Overall, this study provides molecular and evolutionary insights into the regulation of NUE and facilitates the breeding of rice cultivars with higher NUE.
Cowpeas (tropical legumes) are important in ensuring food and nutritional security in developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Herein, we report two high-quality genome assemblies of grain and vegetable cowpeas and we re-sequenced 344 accessions to characterize the genomic variations landscape. We identified 39 loci for ten important agronomic traits and more than 541 potential loci that underwent selection during cowpea domestication and improvement. In particular, the synchronous selections of the pod-shattering loci and their neighboring stress-relevant loci probably led to the enhancement of pod-shattering resistance and the compromise of stress resistance during the domestication from grain to vegetable cowpeas. Moreover, differential selections on multiple loci associated with pod length, grain number per pod, seed weight, pod and seed soluble sugars, and seed crude proteins shaped the yield and quality diversity in cowpeas. Our findings provide genomic insights into cowpea domestication and improvement footprints, enabling further genome-informed cultivar improvement of cowpeas.
Almost every recent Alzheimer's disease (AD) genome-wide association study (GWAS) has performed meta-analysis to combine studies with clinical diagnosis of AD with studies that use proxy phenotypes based on parental disease history. Here, we report major limitations in current GWAS-by-proxy (GWAX) practices due to uncorrected survival bias and nonrandom participation in parental illness surveys, which cause substantial discrepancies between AD GWAS and GWAX results. We demonstrate that the current AD GWAX provide highly misleading genetic correlations between AD risk and higher education, which subsequently affects a variety of genetic epidemiological applications involving AD and cognition. Our study sheds light on potential issues in the design and analysis of middle-aged biobank cohorts and underscores the need for caution when interpreting genetic association results based on proxy-reported parental disease history.
Rare coding mutations cause similar to 45% of congenital heart disease (CHD). Noncoding mutations that perturb cis-regulatory elements (CREs) likely contribute to the remaining cases, but their identification has been problematic. Using a lentiviral massively parallel reporter assay (lentiMPRA) in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs), we functionally evaluated 6,590 noncoding de novo variants (ncDNVs) prioritized from the whole-genome sequencing of 750 CHD trios. A total of 403 ncDNVs substantially affected cardiac CRE activity. A majority increased enhancer activity, often at regions with undetectable reference sequence activity. Of ten DNVs tested by introduction into their native genomic context, four altered the expression of neighboring genes and iPSC-CM transcriptional state. To prioritize future DNVs for functional testing, we used the MPRA data to develop a regression model, EpiCard. Analysis of an independent CHD cohort by EpiCard found enrichment of DNVs. Together, we developed a scalable system to measure the effect of ncDNVs on CRE activity and deployed it to systematically assess the contribution of ncDNVs to CHD. Lentiviral massively parallel reporter assay (lentiMPRA) analysis of cardiac cis-regulatory elements characterizes the effects of noncoding de novo variants identified in congenital heart disease. EpiCard is a model for variant prioritization.
The mechanism by which mammalian liver cell responses are coordinated during tissue homeostasis and perturbation is poorly understood, representing a major obstacle in our understanding of many diseases. This knowledge gap is caused by the difficulty involved with studying multiple cell types in different states and locations, particularly when these are transient. We have combined Stereo-seq (spatiotemporal enhanced resolution omics-sequencing) with single-cell transcriptomic profiling of 473,290 cells to generate a high-definition spatiotemporal atlas of mouse liver homeostasis and regeneration at the whole-lobe scale. Our integrative study dissects in detail the molecular gradients controlling liver cell function, systematically defining how gene networks are dynamically modulated through intercellular communication to promote regeneration. Among other important regulators, we identified the transcriptional cofactor TBL1XR1 as a rheostat linking inflammation to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling for facilitating hepatocyte proliferation. Our data and analytical pipelines lay the foundation for future high-definition tissue-scale atlases of organ physiology and malfunction.
Although immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapies have shifted the treatment paradigm for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), many patients remain resistant. Here we characterize the tumor cell states and spatial cellular compositions of the NSCLC tumor microenvironment (TME) by analyzing single-cell transcriptomes of 232,080 cells and spatially resolved transcriptomes of tumors from 19 patients before and after ICB-chemotherapy. We find that tumor cells and secreted phosphoprotein 1-positive macrophages interact with collagen type XI alpha 1 chain-positive cancer-associated fibroblasts to stimulate the deposition and entanglement of collagen fibers at tumor boundaries, obstructing T cell infiltration and leading to poor prognosis. We also reveal distinct states of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) in the TME. Activated TLSs are associated with improved prognosis, whereas a hypoxic microenvironment appears to suppress TLS development and is associated with poor prognosis. Our study provides novel insights into different cellular and molecular components corresponding to NSCLC ICB-chemotherapeutic responsiveness, which will benefit future individualized immuno-chemotherapy.
The maize root system has been reshaped by indirect selection during global adaptation to new agricultural environments. In this study, we characterized the root systems of more than 9,000 global maize accessions and its wild relatives, defining the geographical signature and genomic basis of variation in seminal root number. We demonstrate that seminal root number has increased during maize domestication followed by a decrease in response to limited water availability in locally adapted varieties. By combining environmental and phenotypic association analyses with linkage mapping, we identified genes linking environmental variation and seminal root number. Functional characterization of the transcription factor ZmHb77 and in silico root modeling provides evidence that reshaping root system architecture by reducing the number of seminal roots and promoting lateral root density is beneficial for the resilience of maize seedlings to drought.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of human complex traits or diseases often implicate genetic loci that span hundreds or thousands of genetic variants, many of which have similar statistical significance. While statistical fine-mapping in individuals of European ancestry has made important discoveries, cross-population fine-mapping has the potential to improve power and resolution by capitalizing on the genomic diversity across ancestries. Here we present SuSiEx, an accurate and computationally efficient method for cross-population fine-mapping. SuSiEx integrates data from an arbitrary number of ancestries, explicitly models population-specific allele frequencies and linkage disequilibrium patterns, accounts for multiple causal variants in a genomic region and can be applied to GWAS summary statistics. We comprehensively assessed the performance of SuSiEx using simulations. We further showed that SuSiEx improves the fine-mapping of a range of quantitative traits available in both the UK Biobank and Taiwan Biobank, and improves the fine-mapping of schizophrenia-associated loci by integrating GWAS across East Asian and European ancestries.
Although high-dimensional clinical data (HDCD) are increasingly available in biobank-scale datasets, their use for genetic discovery remains challenging. Here we introduce an unsupervised deep learning model, Representation Learning for Genetic Discovery on Low-Dimensional Embeddings (REGLE), for discovering associations between genetic variants and HDCD. REGLE leverages variational autoencoders to compute nonlinear disentangled embeddings of HDCD, which become the inputs to genome-wide association studies (GWAS). REGLE can uncover features not captured by existing expert-defined features and enables the creation of accurate disease-specific polygenic risk scores (PRSs) in datasets with very few labeled data. We apply REGLE to perform GWAS on respiratory and circulatory HDCD-spirograms measuring lung function and photoplethysmograms measuring blood volume changes. REGLE replicates known loci while identifying others not previously detected. REGLE are predictive of overall survival, and PRSs constructed from REGLE loci improve disease prediction across multiple biobanks. Overall, REGLE contain clinically relevant information beyond that captured by existing expert-defined features, leading to improved genetic discovery and disease prediction.
Measures of selective constraint on genes have been used for many applications, including clinical interpretation of rare coding variants, disease gene discovery and studies of genome evolution. However, widely used metrics are severely underpowered at detecting constraints for the shortest similar to 25% of genes, potentially causing important pathogenic mutations to be overlooked. Here we developed a framework combining a population genetics model with machine learning on gene features to enable accurate inference of an interpretable constraint metric, s(het). Our estimates outperform existing metrics for prioritizing genes important for cell essentiality, human disease and other phenotypes, especially for short genes. Our estimates of selective constraint should have wide utility for characterizing genes relevant to human disease. Finally, our inference framework, GeneBayes, provides a flexible platform that can improve the estimation of many gene-level properties, such as rare variant burden or gene expression differences.
Soybean provides protein, oil and multiple health-related compounds. Understanding the effects of structural variations (SVs) on economic traits in modern breeding is important for soybean improvement. Here we assembled the high-quality genome of modern cultivar Nongdadou2 (NDD2) and identified 25,814 SV-gene pairs compared to 29 reported genomes, with 13 NDD2-private SVs validated in 547 deep-resequencing (average = 18.05-fold) accessions, which advances our understanding of genomic variation biology. We found some insertions/deletions involved in seed protein and weight formation, an inversion related to adaptation to drought and a large intertranslocation implicated in a key divergence event in soybean. Of 749,714 SVs from 547 accessions, 6,013 were significantly associated with 22 yield-related and seed-quality-related traits determined in ten location x year environments. We uncovered 1,761 associated SVs that hit genes or regulatory regions, with 12 in GmMQT influencing oil and isoflavone contents. Our work provides resources and insights into SV roles in soybean improvement.
To decipher the genetic diversity within the cucurbit genus Citrullus, we generated telomere-to-telomere (T2T) assemblies of 27 distinct genotypes, encompassing all seven Citrullus species. This T2T super-pangenome has expanded the previously published reference genome, T2T-G42, by adding 399.2 Mb and 11,225 genes. Comparative analysis has unveiled gene variants and structural variations (SVs), shedding light on watermelon evolution and domestication processes that enhanced attributes such as bitterness and sugar content while compromising disease resistance. Multidisease-resistant loci from Citrullus amarus and Citrullus mucosospermus were successfully introduced into cultivated Citrullus lanatus. The SVs identified in C. lanatus have not only been inherited from cordophanus but also from C. mucosospermus, suggesting additional ancestors beyond cordophanus in the lineage of cultivated watermelon. Our investigation substantially improves the comprehension of watermelon genome diversity, furnishing comprehensive reference genomes for all Citrullus species. This advancement aids in the exploration and genetic enhancement of watermelon using its wild relatives.
Although individual genomic structural variants (SVs) are known to influence gene expression and trait variation, the extent and scale of SV impact across a species remain unknown. In the present study, we constructed a reference library of 334,461 SVs from genome assemblies of 16 representative morphotypes of neopolyploid Brassica napus accessions and detected 258,865 SVs in 2,105 resequenced genomes. Coupling with 5 tissue population transcriptomes, we uncovered 285,976 SV-expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) that associate with altered expression of 73,580 genes. We developed a pipeline for the high-throughput joint analyses of SV-genome-wide association studies (SV-GWASs) and transcriptome-wide association studies of phenomic data, eQTLs and eQTL-GWAS colocalization, and identified 726 SV-gene expression-trait variation associations, some of which were verified by transgenics. The pervasive SV impact on how SV reshapes trait variation was demonstrated with the glucosinolate biosynthesis and transport pathway. The study highlighting the impact of genome-wide and species-scale SVs provides a powerful methodological strategy and valuable resources for studying evolution, gene discovery and breeding.
During mitosis, condensin activity is thought to interfere with interphase chromatin structures. To investigate genome folding principles in the absence of chromatin loop extrusion, we codepleted condensin I and condensin II, which triggered mitotic chromosome compartmentalization in ways similar to that in interphase. However, two distinct euchromatic compartments, indistinguishable in interphase, emerged upon condensin loss with different interaction preferences and dependencies on H3K27ac. Constitutive heterochromatin gradually self-aggregated and cocompartmentalized with facultative heterochromatin, contrasting with their separation during interphase. Notably, some cis-regulatory element contacts became apparent even in the absence of CTCF/cohesin-mediated structures. Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) proteins, which are thought to partition constitutive heterochromatin, were absent from mitotic chromosomes, suggesting, surprisingly, that constitutive heterochromatin can self-aggregate without HP1. Indeed, in cells traversing from M to G1 phase in the combined absence of HP1 alpha, HP1 beta and HP1 gamma, constitutive heterochromatin compartments are normally re-established. In sum, condensin-deficient mitotic chromosomes illuminate forces of genome compartmentalization not identified in interphase cells.
The impact of variations in the three-dimensional structure of the genome has been recognized, but solid cancer tissue studies are limited. Here, we performed integrated deep Hi-C sequencing with matched whole-genome sequencing, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) sequencing and RNA sequencing across a cohort of 80 biopsy samples from patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Dramatic differences were present in gene expression, 5-methylcytosine/5hmC methylation and in structural variation versus mutation rate between A and B (open and closed) chromatin compartments. A subset of tumors exhibited depleted regional chromatin contacts at the AR locus, linked to extrachromosomal circular DNA (ecDNA) and worse response to AR signaling inhibitors. We also identified topological subtypes associated with stark differences in methylation structure, gene expression and prognosis. Our data suggested that DNA interactions may predispose to structural variant formation, exemplified by the recurrent TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. This comprehensive integrated sequencing effort represents a unique clinical tumor resource.
Many methods have been developed to leverage expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data to nominate candidate genes from genome-wide association studies. These methods, including colocalization, transcriptome-wide association studies (TWAS) and Mendelian randomization-based methods; however, all suffer from a key problem-when assessing the role of a gene in a trait using its eQTLs, nearby variants and genetic components of other genes' expression may be correlated with these eQTLs and have direct effects on the trait, acting as potential confounders. Our extensive simulations showed that existing methods fail to account for these 'genetic confounders', resulting in severe inflation of false positives. Our new method, causal-TWAS (cTWAS), borrows ideas from statistical fine-mapping and allows us to adjust all genetic confounders. cTWAS showed calibrated false discovery rates in simulations, and its application on several common traits discovered new candidate genes. In conclusion, cTWAS provides a robust statistical framework for gene discovery.
Obesity is a major risk factor for many common diseases and has a substantial heritable component. To identify new genetic determinants, we performed exome-sequence analyses for adult body mass index (BMI) in up to 587,027 individuals. We identified rare loss-of-function variants in two genes (BSN and APBA1) with effects substantially larger than those of well-established obesity genes such as MC4R. In contrast to most other obesity-related genes, rare variants in BSN and APBA1 were not associated with normal variation in childhood adiposity. Furthermore, BSN protein-truncating variants (PTVs) magnified the influence of common genetic variants associated with BMI, with a common variant polygenic score exhibiting an effect twice as large in BSN PTV carriers than in noncarriers. Finally, we explored the plasma proteomic signatures of BSN PTV carriers as well as the functional consequences of BSN deletion in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived hypothalamic neurons. Collectively, our findings implicate degenerative processes in synaptic function in the etiology of adult-onset obesity.
Cultivated peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) is a widely grown oilseed crop worldwide; however, the events leading to its origin and diversification are not fully understood. Here by combining chloroplast and whole-genome sequence data from a large germplasm collection, we show that the two subspecies of A. hypogaea (hypogaea and fastigiata) likely arose from distinct allopolyploidization and domestication events. Peanut genetic clusters were then differentiated in relation to dissemination routes and breeding efforts. A combination of linkage mapping and genome-wide association studies allowed us to characterize genes and genomic regions related to main peanut morpho-agronomic traits, namely flowering pattern, inner tegument color, growth habit, pod/seed weight and oil content. Together, our findings shed light on the evolutionary history and phenotypic diversification of peanuts and might be of broad interest to plant breeders.
Gray leaf spot (GLS), caused by the fungal pathogens Cercospora zeae-maydis and Cercospora zeina, is a major foliar disease of maize worldwide (Zea mays L.). Here we demonstrate that ZmWAKL encoding cell-wall-associated receptor kinase-like protein is the causative gene at the major quantitative disease resistance locus against GLS. The ZmWAKL(Y) protein, encoded by the resistance allele, can self-associate and interact with a leucine-rich repeat immune-related kinase ZmWIK on the plasma membrane. The ZmWAKL(Y)/ZmWIK receptor complex interacts with and phosphorylates the receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase (RLCK) ZmBLK1, which in turn phosphorylates its downstream NADPH oxidase ZmRBOH4. Upon pathogen infection, ZmWAKL(Y) phosphorylation activity is transiently increased, initiating immune signaling from ZmWAKL(Y), ZmWIK, ZmBLK1 to ZmRBOH4, ultimately triggering a reactive oxygen species burst. Our study thus uncovers the role of the maize ZmWAKL-ZmWIK-ZmBLK1-ZmRBOH4 receptor/signaling/executor module in perceiving the pathogen invasion, transducing immune signals, activating defense responses and conferring increased resistance to GLS.
The organization of mammalian genomes features a complex, multiscale three-dimensional (3D) architecture, whose functional significance remains elusive because of limited single-cell technologies that can concurrently profile genome organization and transcriptional activities. Here, we introduce genome architecture and gene expression by sequencing (GAGE-seq), a scalable, robust single-cell co-assay measuring 3D genome structure and transcriptome simultaneously within the same cell. Applied to mouse brain cortex and human bone marrow CD34+ cells, GAGE-seq characterized the intricate relationships between 3D genome and gene expression, showing that multiscale 3D genome features inform cell-type-specific gene expression and link regulatory elements to target genes. Integration with spatial transcriptomic data revealed in situ 3D genome variations in mouse cortex. Observations in human hematopoiesis unveiled discordant changes between 3D genome organization and gene expression, underscoring a complex, temporal interplay at the single-cell level. GAGE-seq provides a powerful, cost-effective approach for exploring genome structure and gene expression relationships at the single-cell level across diverse biological contexts.
Spatial transcriptomic techniques offer unprecedented insights into the molecular organization of complex tissues. However, integrating cost-effectiveness, high throughput, a wide field of view and compatibility with three-dimensional (3D) volumes has been challenging. Here we introduce microfluidics-assisted grid chips for spatial transcriptome sequencing (MAGIC-seq), a new method that combines carbodiimide chemistry, spatial combinatorial indexing and innovative microfluidics design. This technique allows sensitive and reproducible profiling of diverse tissue types, achieving an eightfold increase in throughput, minimal cost and reduced batch effects. MAGIC-seq breaks conventional microfluidics limits by enhancing barcoding efficiency and enables analysis of whole postnatal mouse sections, providing comprehensive cellular structure elucidation at near single-cell resolution, uncovering transcriptional variations and dynamic trajectories of mouse organogenesis. Our 3D transcriptomic atlas of the developing mouse brain, consisting of 93 sections, reveals the molecular and cellular landscape, serving as a valuable resource for neuroscience and developmental biology. Overall, MAGIC-seq is a high-throughput, cost-effective, large field of view and versatile method for spatial transcriptomic studies.
Gray leaf spot, northern leaf blight and southern leaf blight are three of the most destructive foliar diseases affecting maize (Zea mays L.). Here we identified a gene, ZmCPK39, that encodes a calcium-dependent protein kinase and negatively regulates quantitative resistance to these three diseases. The ZmCPK39 allele in the resistant line displayed significantly lower pathogen-induced gene expression than that in the susceptible line. A marked decrease in ZmCPK39 abundance mitigated the phosphorylation and degradation of the transcription factor ZmDi19. This led to elevated expression of ZmPR10, a gene known to encode an antimicrobial protein, thereby enhancing maize resistance to foliar diseases. Moreover, the F1 hybrid with reduced ZmCPK39 expression favored disease resistance, thereby increasing yield. Hence, the discovery of the ZmCPK39-ZmDi19-ZmPR10 immune module provides insight into the mechanisms underlying broad-spectrum quantitative disease resistance and also offers a new avenue for the genetic control of maize foliar diseases.
