Single-cell genomics technologies have accelerated our understanding of cell-state heterogeneity in diverse contexts. Although single-cell RNA sequencing identifies rare populations that express specific marker transcript combinations, traditional flow sorting requires cell surface markers with high-fidelity antibodies, limiting our ability to interrogate these populations. In addition, many single-cell studies require the isolation of nuclei from tissue, eliminating the ability to enrich learned rare cell states based on extranuclear protein markers. In the present report, we addressed these limitations by developing Programmable Enrichment via RNA FlowFISH by sequencing (PERFF-seq), a scalable assay that enables scRNA-seq profiling of subpopulations defined by the abundance of specific RNA transcripts. Across immune populations (n = 184,126 cells) and fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded brain tissue (n = 33,145 nuclei), we demonstrated that programmable sorting logic via RNA-based cytometry can isolate rare cell populations and uncover phenotypic heterogeneity via downstream, high-throughput, single-cell genomics analyses.
Identifying gene expression differences in heterogeneous tissues across conditions is a fundamental biological task, enabled by multi-condition single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Current data analysis approaches divide the constituent cells into clusters meant to represent cell types, but such discrete categorization tends to be an unsatisfactory model of the underlying biology. Here, we introduce latent embedding multivariate regression (LEMUR), a model that operates without, or before, commitment to discrete categorization. LEMUR (1) integrates data from different conditions, (2) predicts each cell's gene expression changes as a function of the conditions and its position in latent space and (3) for each gene, identifies a compact neighborhood of cells with consistent differential expression. We apply LEMUR to cancer, zebrafish development and spatial gradients in Alzheimer's disease, demonstrating its broad applicability.
Complete characterization of the genetic effects on gene expression is needed to elucidate tissue biology and the etiology of complex traits. In the present study, we analyzed 2,344 subcutaneous adipose tissue samples and identified 34,774 conditionally distinct expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) signals at 18,476 genes. Over half of eQTL genes exhibited at least two eQTL signals. Compared with primary eQTL signals, nonprimary eQTL signals had lower effect sizes, lower minor allele frequencies and less promoter enrichment; they corresponded to genes with higher heritability and higher tolerance for loss of function. Colocalization of eQTLs with genome-wide association study (GWAS) signals for 28 cardiometabolic traits identified 1,835 genes. Inclusion of nonprimary eQTL signals increased discovery of colocalized GWAS-eQTL signals by 46%. Furthermore, 21 genes with >= 2 colocalized GWAS-eQTL signals showed a mediating gene dosage effect on the GWAS trait. Thus, expanded eQTL identification reveals more mechanisms underlying complex traits and improves understanding of the complexity of gene expression regulation.
Tandem repeat (TR) size variation is implicated in similar to 50 neurological disorders, yet its impact on gene regulation in the human brain remains largely unknown. In the present study, we quantified the impact of TR size variation on brain gene regulation across distinct molecular phenotypes, based on 4,412 multi-omics samples from 1,597 donors, including 1,586 newly sequenced ones. We identified similar to 2.2 million TR molecular quantitative trait loci (TR-xQTLs), linking similar to 139,000 unique TRs to nearby molecular phenotypes, including many known disease-risk TRs, such as the G(2)C(4) expansion in C9orf72 associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Fine-mapping revealed similar to 18,700 TRs as potential causal variants. Our in vitro experiments further confirmed the causal and independent regulatory effects of three TRs. Additional colocalization analysis indicated the potential causal role of TR variation in brain-related phenotypes, highlighted by a 3'-UTR TR in NUDT14 linked to cortical surface area and a TG repeat in PLEKHA1, associated with Alzheimer's disease.
The mutational landscape of TP53, a tumor suppressor mutated in about half of all cancers, includes over 2,000 known missense mutations. To fully leverage TP53 mutation status for personalized medicine, a thorough understanding of the functional diversity of these mutations is essential. We conducted a deep mutational scan using saturation genome editing with CRISPR-mediated homology-directed repair to engineer 9,225 TP53 variants in cancer cells. This high-resolution approach, covering 94.5% of all cancer-associated TP53 missense mutations, precisely mapped the impact of individual mutations on tumor cell fitness, surpassing previous deep mutational scan studies in distinguishing benign from pathogenic variants. Our results revealed even subtle loss-of-function phenotypes and identified promising mutants for pharmacological reactivation. Moreover, we uncovered the roles of splicing alterations and nonsense-mediated messenger RNA decay in mutation-driven TP53 dysfunction. These findings underscore the power of saturation genome editing in advancing clinical TP53 variant interpretation for genetic counseling and personalized cancer therapy.
Crop genomes accumulate deleterious mutations-a phenomenon known as the cost of domestication. Precision genome editing has been proposed to eliminate such potentially harmful mutations; however, experimental demonstration is lacking. Here we identified a deleterious mutation in the tomato transcription factor SUPPRESSOR OF SP2 (SSP2), which became prevalent in the domesticated germplasm and diminished DNA binding to genome-wide targets. We found that the action of SSP2 is partially redundant with that of its paralog SSP in regulating shoot and inflorescence architecture. However, redundancy was compromised during tomato domestication and lost completely in the closely related species Physalis grisea, in which a single ortholog regulates shoot branching. We applied base editing to directly repair the deleterious mutation in cultivated tomato and obtained plants with compact growth that provide an early fruit yield. Our work shows how deleterious variants have sensitized modern genotypes for phenotypic tuning and illustrates how repairing deleterious mutations with genome editing may allow predictable crop improvement.
Gene expression quantitative trait loci are widely used to infer relationships between genes and central nervous system (CNS) phenotypes; however, the effect of brain disease on these inferences is unclear. Using 2,348,438 single-nuclei profiles from 391 disease-case and control brains, we report 13,939 genes whose expression correlated with genetic variation, of which 16.7-40.8% (depending on cell type) showed disease-dependent allelic effects. Across 501 colocalizations for 30 CNS traits, 23.6% had a disease dependency, even after adjusting for disease status. To estimate the unconfounded effect of genes on outcomes, we repeated the analysis using nondiseased brains (n = 183) and reported an additional 91 colocalizations not present in the larger mixed disease and control dataset, demonstrating enhanced interpretation of disease-associated variants. Principled implementation of single-cell Mendelian randomization in control-only brains identified 140 putatively causal gene-trait associations, of which 11 were replicated in the UK Biobank, prioritizing candidate peripheral biomarkers predictive of CNS outcomes.
Segmental duplications (SDs) contribute significantly to human disease, evolution and diversity but have been difficult to resolve at the sequence level. We present a population genetics survey of SDs by analyzing 170 human genome assemblies (from 85 samples representing 38 Africans and 47 non-Africans) in which the majority of autosomal SDs are fully resolved using long-read sequence assembly. Excluding the acrocentric short arms and sex chromosomes, we identify 173.2 Mb of duplicated sequence (47.4 Mb not present in the telomere-to-telomere reference) distinguishing fixed from structurally polymorphic events. We find that intrachromosomal SDs are among the most variable, with rare events mapping near their progenitor sequences. African genomes harbor significantly more intrachromosomal SDs and are more likely to have recently duplicated gene families with higher copy numbers than non-African samples. Comparison to a resource of 563 million full-length isoform sequencing reads identifies 201 novel, potentially protein-coding genes corresponding to these copy number polymorphic SDs.
Genome-wide association studies have identified approximately 200 genetic risk loci for breast cancer, but the causal variants and target genes are mostly unknown. We sought to fine-map all known breast cancer risk loci using genome-wide association study data from 172,737 female breast cancer cases and 242,009 controls of African, Asian and European ancestry. We identified 332 independent association signals for breast cancer risk, including 131 signals not reported previously, and for 50 of them, we narrowed the credible causal variants down to a single variant. Analyses integrating functional genomics data identified 195 putative susceptibility genes, enriched in PI3K/AKT, TNF/NF-kappa B, p53 and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways. Single-cell RNA sequencing or in vitro experiment data provided additional functional evidence for 105 genes. Our study uncovered large numbers of association signals and candidate susceptibility genes for breast cancer, uncovered breast cancer genetics and biology, and supported the value of including multi-ancestry data in fine-mapping analyses.
Human adipose depots are functionally distinct. Yet, recent single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) analyses largely uncovered overlapping or similar cell-type landscapes. We hypothesized that adipocyte subtypes, differentiation trajectories and/or intercellular communication patterns could illuminate this depot similarity-difference gap. For this, we performed snRNA-seq of human subcutaneous or visceral adipose tissues (five or ten samples, respectively). Of 27,665 adipocyte nuclei in both depots, most were 'classical', namely enriched in lipid metabolism pathways. However, we also observed 'nonclassical' adipocyte subtypes, enriched in immune-related, extracellular matrix deposition (fibrosis), vascularization or angiogenesis or ribosomal and mitochondrial processes. Pseudo-temporal analysis showed a developmental trajectory from adipose progenitor cells to classical adipocytes via nonclassical adipocytes, suggesting that the classical state stems from loss, rather than gain, of specialized functions. Last, intercellular communication routes were consistent with the different inflammatory tone of the two depots. Jointly, these findings provide a high-resolution view into the contribution of cellular composition, differentiation and intercellular communication patterns to human fat depot differences.
Transcription factors are frequent cancer driver genes, exhibiting noted specificity based on the precise cell of origin. We demonstrate that ZIC1 exhibits loss-of-function (LOF) somatic events in group 4 (G4) medulloblastoma through recurrent point mutations, subchromosomal deletions and mono-allelic epigenetic repression (60% of G4 medulloblastoma). In contrast, highly similar SHH medulloblastoma exhibits distinct and diametrically opposed gain-of-function mutations and copy number gains (20% of SHH medulloblastoma). Overexpression of ZIC1 suppresses the growth of group 3 medulloblastoma models, whereas it promotes the proliferation of SHH medulloblastoma precursor cells. SHH medulloblastoma ZIC1 mutants show increased activity versus wild-type ZIC1, whereas G4 medulloblastoma ZIC1 mutants exhibit LOF phenotypes. Distinct ZIC1 mutations affect cells of the rhombic lip in diametrically opposed ways, suggesting that ZIC1 is a critical developmental transcriptional regulator in both the normal and transformed rhombic lip and identifying ZIC1 as an exquisitely context-dependent driver gene in medulloblastoma.
Sequence-based machine-learning models trained on genomics data improve genetic variant interpretation by providing functional predictions describing their impact on the cis-regulatory code. However, current tools do not predict RNA-seq expression profiles because of modeling challenges. Here, we introduce Borzoi, a model that learns to predict cell-type-specific and tissue-specific RNA-seq coverage from DNA sequence. Using statistics derived from Borzoi's predicted coverage, we isolate and accurately score DNA variant effects across multiple layers of regulation, including transcription, splicing and polyadenylation. Evaluated on quantitative trait loci, Borzoi is competitive with and often outperforms state-of-the-art models trained on individual regulatory functions. By applying attribution methods to the derived statistics, we extract cis-regulatory motifs driving RNA expression and post-transcriptional regulation in normal tissues. The wide availability of RNA-seq data across species, conditions and assays profiling specific aspects of regulation emphasizes the potential of this approach to decipher the mapping from DNA sequence to regulatory function.
The advent of single-molecule, long-read sequencing (LRS) technologies by Oxford Nanopore Technologies and Pacific Biosciences has revolutionized genomics, transcriptomics and, more recently, epigenomics research. These technologies offer distinct advantages, including the direct detection of methylated DNA and simultaneous assessment of DNA sequences spanning multiple kilobases along with their modifications at the single-molecule level. This has enabled the development of new assays for analyzing chromatin states and made it possible to integrate data for DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility, transcription factor binding and histone modifications, thereby facilitating comprehensive epigenomic profiling. Owing to recent advancements, alternative, nascent and translating transcripts can be detected using LRS approaches. This Review discusses LRS-based experimental and computational strategies for characterizing chromatin states and highlights their advantages over short-read sequencing methods. Furthermore, we demonstrate how various long-read methods can be integrated to design multi-omics studies to investigate the relationship between chromatin states and transcriptional dynamics.
Profiling tumors with single-cell RNA sequencing has the potential to identify recurrent patterns of transcription variation related to cancer progression, and to produce therapeutically relevant insights. However, strong intertumor heterogeneity can obscure more subtle patterns that are shared across tumors. Here we introduce a statistical method, generalized binary covariance decomposition (GBCD), to address this problem. We show that GBCD can decompose transcriptional heterogeneity into interpretable components-including patient-specific, dataset-specific and shared components relevant to disease subtypes-and that, in the presence of strong intertumor heterogeneity, it can produce more interpretable results than existing methods. Applied to data on pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, GBCD produced a refined characterization of existing tumor subtypes, and identified a gene expression program prognostic of poor survival independent of tumor stage and subtype. The gene expression program is enriched for genes involved in stress responses, and suggests a role for the integrated stress response in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Since the Human Genome Project, the consensus position in genomics has been that data should be shared widely to achieve the greatest societal benefit. This position relies on imprecise definitions of the concept of 'broad data sharing'. Accordingly, the implementation of data sharing varies among landmark genomic studies. In this Perspective, we identify definitions of broad that have been used interchangeably, despite their distinct implications. We further offer a framework with clarified concepts for genomic data sharing and probe six examples in genomics that produced public data. Finally, we articulate three challenges. First, we explore the need to reinterpret the limits of general research use data. Second, we consider the governance of public data deposition from extant samples. Third, we ask whether, in light of changing concepts of broad, participants should be encouraged to share their status as participants publicly or not. Each of these challenges is followed with recommendations.
The rapid growth of modern biobanks is creating new opportunities for large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWASs) and the analysis of complex traits. However, performing GWASs on millions of samples often leads to trade-offs between computational efficiency and statistical power, reducing the benefits of large-scale data collection efforts. We developed Quickdraws, a method that increases association power in quantitative and binary traits without sacrificing computational efficiency, leveraging a spike-and-slab prior on variant effects, stochastic variational inference and graphics processing unit acceleration. We applied Quickdraws to 79 quantitative and 50 binary traits in 405,088 UK Biobank samples, identifying 4.97% and 3.25% more associations than REGENIE and 22.71% and 7.07% more than FastGWA. Quickdraws had costs comparable to REGENIE, FastGWA and SAIGE on the UK Biobank Research Analysis Platform service, while being substantially faster than BOLT-LMM. These results highlight the promise of leveraging machine learning techniques for scalable GWASs without sacrificing power or robustness.
Rice production is facing substantial threats from global warming associated with extreme temperatures. Here we report that modifying a heat stress-induced negative regulator, a negative regulator of thermotolerance 1 (NAT1), increases wax deposition and enhances thermotolerance in rice. We demonstrated that the C2H2 family transcription factor NAT1 directly inhibits bHLH110 expression, and bHLH110 directly promotes the expression of wax biosynthetic genes CER1/CER1L under heat stress conditions. In situ hybridization revealed that both NAT1 and bHLH110 are predominantly expressed in epidermal layers. By using gene-editing technology, we successfully mutated NAT1 to eliminate its inhibitory effects on wax biosynthesis and improved thermotolerance without yield penalty under normal temperature conditions. Field trials further confirmed the potential of NAT1-edited rice to increase seed-setting rate and grain yield. Therefore, our findings shed light on the regulatory mechanisms governing wax biosynthesis under heat stress conditions in rice and provide a strategy to enhance heat resilience through the modification of NAT1.
Ongoing efforts to improve sheep reference genome assemblies still leave many gaps and incomplete regions, resulting in a few common failures and errors in genomic studies. Here, we report a 2.85-Gb gap-free telomere-to-telomere genome of a ram (T2T-sheep1.0), including all autosomes and the X and Y chromosomes. This genome adds 220.05 Mb of previously unresolved regions and 754 new genes to the most updated reference assembly ARS-UI_Ramb_v3.0; it contains four types of repeat units (SatI, SatII, SatIII and CenY) in centromeric regions. T2T-sheep1.0 has a base accuracy of more than 99.999%, corrects several structural errors in previous reference assemblies and improves structural variant detection in repetitive sequences. Alignment of whole-genome short-read sequences of global domestic and wild sheep against T2T-sheep1.0 identifies 2,664,979 new single-nucleotide polymorphisms in previously unresolved regions, which improves the population genetic analyses and detection of selective signals for domestication (for example, ABCC4) and wool fineness (for example, FOXQ1).
Huntington's disease, one of more than 50 inherited repeat expansion disorders1, is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disease caused by a CAG expansion in HTT2. Inherited CAG repeat length is the primary determinant of age of onset, with human genetic studies underscoring that the disease is driven by the CAG length-dependent propensity of the repeat to further expand in the brain3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8-9. Routes to slowing somatic CAG expansion, therefore, hold promise for disease-modifying therapies. Several DNA repair genes, notably in the mismatch repair pathway, modify somatic expansion in Huntington's disease mouse models10. To identify novel modifiers of somatic expansion, we used CRISPR-Cas9 editing in Huntington's disease knock-in mice to enable in vivo screening of expansion-modifier candidates at scale. This included testing of Huntington's disease onset modifier genes emerging from human genome-wide association studies as well as interactions between modifier genes, providing insight into pathways underlying CAG expansion and potential therapeutic targets.
Understanding the molecular landscape of nonmuscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) is essential to improve risk assessment and treatment regimens. We performed a comprehensive genomic analysis of patients with NMIBC using whole-exome sequencing (n = 438), shallow whole-genome sequencing (n = 362) and total RNA sequencing (n = 414). A large genomic variation within NMIBC was observed and correlated with different molecular subtypes. Frequent loss of heterozygosity in FGFR3 and 17p (affecting TP53) was found in tumors with mutations in FGFR3 and TP53, respectively. Whole-genome doubling (WGD) was observed in 15% of the tumors and was associated with worse outcomes. Tumors with WGD were genomically unstable, with alterations in cell-cycle-related genes and an altered immune composition. Finally, integrative clustering of multi-omics data highlighted the important role of genomic instability and immune cell exhaustion in disease aggressiveness. These findings advance our understanding of genomic differences associated with disease aggressiveness in NMIBC and may ultimately improve patient stratification.
Plant pathogens pose a continuous threat to global food production. Recent discoveries in plant immunity research unveiled a unique protein family characterized by an unusual resistance protein structure that combines two kinase domains. This study demonstrates the widespread occurrence of tandem kinase proteins (TKPs) across the plant kingdom. An examination of 104 plant species' genomes uncovered 2,682 TKPs. The majority (95.6%) of these kinase domains are part of the receptor-like kinase-Pelle family, which is crucial for cell surface responses in plant immunity. Notably, 90% of TKPs comprise dual kinase domains, with over 50% being pseudokinases. Over 56% of these proteins harbor 127 different integrated domains, and over 47% include a transmembrane domain. TKP pseudokinases and/or integrated domains probably serve as decoys, engaging with pathogen effectors to trigger plant immunity. The TKP Atlas we created sheds light on the mechanisms of TKP convergent molecular evolution and potential function.
Genetic studies of the metabolome can uncover enzymatic and transport processes shaping human metabolism. Using rare variant aggregation testing based on whole-exome sequencing data to detect genes associated with levels of 1,294 plasma and 1,396 urine metabolites, we discovered 235 gene-metabolite associations, many previously unreported. Complementary approaches (genetic, computational (in silico gene knockouts in whole-body models of human metabolism) and one experimental proof of principle) provided orthogonal evidence that studies of rare, damaging variants in the heterozygous state permit inferences concordant with those from inborn errors of metabolism. Allelic series of functional variants in transporters responsible for transcellular sulfate reabsorption (SLC13A1, SLC26A1) exhibited graded effects on plasma sulfate and human height and pinpointed alleles associated with increased odds of diverse musculoskeletal traits and diseases in the population. This integrative approach can identify new players in incompletely characterized human metabolic reactions and reveal metabolic readouts informative of human traits and diseases.
Complete datasets of genetic variants are key to biodiversity genomic studies. Long-read sequencing technologies allow the routine assembly of highly contiguous, haplotype-resolved reference genomes. However, even when complete, reference genomes from a single individual may bias downstream analyses and fail to adequately represent genetic diversity within a population or species. Pangenome graphs assembled from aligned collections of high-quality genomes can overcome representation bias by integrating sequence information from multiple genomes from the same population, species or genus into a single reference. Here, we review the available tools and data structures to build, visualize and manipulate pangenome graphs while providing practical examples and discussing their applications in biodiversity and conservation genomics across the tree of life.
Ambiguity about whether the histidine-rich calcium-binding protein-coding gene (HisR) or the pore-forming toxin-like gene (PFT) or both are responsible for Fusarium head blight (FHB) resistance conferred by the Fhb1 quantitative trait locus hinders progress toward elucidating Fhb1 resistance mechanisms. Here, with a series of developed lines with or without PFT but all possessing HisR and five HisR-carrying PFT mutant lines created via gene editing, we show that PFT does not confer FHB resistance and that the HisR resistance effect does not require PFT in the tested conditions. We also show that PFT mutations are not associated with morphological and phenological characteristics that often affect FHB severity.
Complex diseases often have distinct mechanisms spanning multiple tissues. We propose tissue-gene fine-mapping (TGFM), which infers the posterior inclusion probability (PIP) for each gene-tissue pair to mediate a disease locus by analyzing summary statistics and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data; TGFM also assigns PIPs to non-mediated variants. TGFM accounts for co-regulation across genes and tissues and models uncertainty in cis-predicted expression models, enabling correct calibration. We applied TGFM to 45 UK Biobank diseases or traits using eQTL data from 38 Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) tissues. TGFM identified an average of 147 PIP > 0.5 causal genetic elements per disease or trait, of which 11% were gene-tissue pairs. Causal gene-tissue pairs identified by TGFM reflected both known biology (for example, TPO-thyroid for hypothyroidism) and biologically plausible findings (for example, SLC20A2-artery aorta for diastolic blood pressure). Application of TGFM to single-cell eQTL data from nine cell types in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), analyzed jointly with GTEx tissues, identified 30 additional causal gene-PBMC cell type pairs.
Members of the KMT2C/D-KDM6A complex are recurrently mutated in urothelial carcinoma and in histologically normal urothelium. Here, using genetically engineered mouse models, we demonstrate that Kmt2c/d knockout in the urothelium led to impaired differentiation, augmented responses to growth and inflammatory stimuli and sensitization to oncogenic transformation by carcinogen and oncogenes. Mechanistically, KMT2D localized to active enhancers and CpG-poor promoters that preferentially regulate the urothelial lineage program and Kmt2c/d knockout led to diminished H3K4me1, H3K27ac and nascent RNA transcription at these sites, which leads to impaired differentiation. Kmt2c/d knockout further led to KMT2A-menin redistribution from KMT2D localized enhancers to CpG-high and bivalent promoters, resulting in derepression of signal-induced immediate early genes. Therapeutically, Kmt2c/d knockout upregulated epidermal growth factor receptor signaling and conferred vulnerability to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors. Together, our data posit that functional loss of Kmt2c/d licenses a molecular 'field effect' priming histologically normal urothelium for oncogenic transformation and presents therapeutic vulnerabilities.
Convergent transcription, that is, the collision of sense and antisense transcription, is ubiquitous in mammalian genomes and believed to diminish RNA expression. Recently, antisense transcription downstream of promoters was found to be surprisingly prevalent. However, functional characteristics of affected promoters are poorly investigated. Here we show that convergent transcription marks an unexpected positively co-regulated promoter constellation. By assessing transcriptional dynamic systems, we identified co-regulated constituent promoters connected through a distinct chromatin structure. Within these cis-regulatory domains, transcription factors can regulate both constituting promoters by binding to only one of them. Convergent promoters comprise about a quarter of all active transcript start sites and initiate 5 '-overlapping antisense RNAs-an RNA class believed previously to be rare. Visualization of nascent RNA molecules reveals convergent cotranscription at these loci. Together, our results demonstrate that co-regulated convergent promoters substantially expand the cis-regulatory repertoire, reveal limitations of the transcription interference model and call for adjusting the promoter concept.
In the past decade, our understanding of how new genes originate in diverse organisms has advanced substantially, and more than a dozen molecular mechanisms for generating initial gene structures were identified, in addition to gene duplication. These new genes have been found to integrate into and modify pre-existing gene networks primarily through mutation and selection, revealing new patterns and rules with stable origination rates across various organisms. This progress has challenged the prevailing belief that new proteins evolve from pre-existing genes, as new genes may arise de novo from noncoding DNA sequences in many organisms, with high rates observed in flowering plants. New genes have important roles in phenotypic and functional evolution across diverse biological processes and structures, with detectable fitness effects of sexual conflict genes that can shape species divergence. Such knowledge of new genes can be of translational value in agriculture and medicine.
Obesity strongly increases the risk of cardiometabolic diseases, yet the underlying mediators of this relationship are not fully understood. Given that obesity strongly influences circulating protein levels, we investigated proteins mediating the effects of obesity on coronary artery disease, stroke and type 2 diabetes. By integrating two-step proteome-wide Mendelian randomization, colocalization, epigenomics and single-cell RNA sequencing, we identified five mediators and prioritized collagen type VI alpha 3 (COL6A3). COL6A3 levels were strongly increased by body mass index and increased coronary artery disease risk. Notably, the carboxyl terminus product of COL6A3, endotrophin, drove this effect. COL6A3 was highly expressed in disease-relevant cell types and tissues. Finally, we found that body fat reduction could reduce plasma levels of COL6A3-derived endotrophin, indicating a tractable way to modify endotrophin levels. In summary, we provide actionable insights into how circulating proteins mediate the effects of obesity on cardiometabolic diseases and prioritize endotrophin as a potential therapeutic target.
Modern sugarcane, a highly allo-autopolyploid organism, has a very complex genome. In the present study, the karyotype and genome architecture of modern sugarcane were investigated, resulting in a genome assembly of 97 chromosomes (8.84 Gb). The allopolyploid genome was divided into subgenomes from Saccharum officinarum (Soh) and S. spontaneum (Ssh), with Soh dominance in the Saccharum hybrid (S. hybrid). Genome shock affected transcriptome dynamics during allopolyploidization. Analysis of an inbreeding population with 192 individuals revealed the underlying genetic basis of transgressive segregation. Population genomics of 310 Saccharum accessions clarified the breeding history of modern sugarcane. Using the haplotype-resolved S. hybrid genome as a reference, genome-wide association studies identified a potential candidate gene for sugar content from S. spontaneum. These findings illuminate the complex genome evolution of allopolyploids, offering opportunities for genomic enhancements and innovative breeding strategies for sugarcane.
